ACT I
SCENE I. London. The palace.
Enter KING HENRY, LORD JOHN OF LANCASTER, the EARL of WESTMORELAND, SIR WALTER BLUNT, and others
So shaken as we are, so wan with care,
Find we a time for frighted peace to pant,
And breathe short-winded accents of new broils
To be commenced in strands afar remote.
No more the thirsty entrance of this soil
Shall daub her lips with her own children's blood
Nor more shall trenching war channel her fields,
Nor bruise her flowerets with the armed hoofs
Of hostile paces: those opposed eyes,
Which, like the meteors of a troubled heaven,
All of one nature, of one substance bred,
Did lately meet in the intestine shock
And furious close of civil butchery
Shall now, in mutual well-beseeming ranks,
March all one way and be no more opposed
Against acquaintance, kindred and allies:
The edge of war, like an ill-sheathed knife,
No more shall cut his master. Therefore, friends,
As far as to the sepulchre of Christ,
Whose soldier now, under whose blessed cross
We are impressed and engaged to fight,
Forthwith a power of English shall we levy
Whose arms were moulded in their mothers' womb
To chase these pagans in those holy fields
Over whose acres walk'd those blessed feet
Which fourteen hundred years ago were nail'd
For our advantage on the bitter cross.
But this our purpose now is twelve month old,
And bootless 'tis to tell you we will go:
Therefore we meet not now. Then let me hear
Of you, my gentle cousin Westmoreland,
What yesternight our council did decree
In forwarding this dear expedience.
My liege, this haste was hot in question,
And many limits of the charge set down
But yesternight: when all athwart there came
A post from Wales loaden with heavy news
Whose worst was, that the noble Mortimer,
Leading the men of Herefordshire to fight
Against the irregular and wild Glendower,
Was by the rude hands of that Welshman taken,
A thousand of his people butchered
Upon whose dead corpse there was such misuse,
Such beastly shameless transformation,
By those Welshwomen done as may not be
Without much shame retold or spoken of.
It seems then that the tidings of this broil
Brake off our business for the Holy Land.
This match'd with other did, my gracious lord
For more uneven and unwelcome news
Came from the north and thus it did import:
On Holy-rood day, the gallant Hotspur there,
Young Harry Percy and brave Archibald,
That ever-valiant and approved Scot,
At Holmedon met,
Where they did spend a sad and bloody hour,
As by discharge of their artillery,
And shape of likelihood, the news was told
For he that brought them, in the very heat
And pride of their contention did take horse,
Uncertain of the issue any way.
Here is a dear, a true industrious friend,
Sir Walter Blunt, new lighted from his horse.
Stain'd with the variation of each soil
Betwixt that Holmedon and this seat of ours
And he hath brought us smooth and welcome news.
The Earl of Douglas is discomfited:
Ten thousand bold Scots, two and twenty knights,
Balk'd in their own blood did Sir Walter see
On Holmedon's plains. Of prisoners, Hotspur took
Mordake the Earl of Fife, and eldest son
To beaten Douglas
Of Murray, Angus, and Menteith:
And is not this an honourable spoil?
A gallant prize? ha, cousin, is it not?
In faith,
It is a conquest for a prince to boast of.
Yea, there thou makest me sad and makest me sin
In envy that my Lord Northumberland
Should be the father to so blest a son,
A son who is the theme of honour's tongue
Amongst a grove, the very straightest plant
Who is sweet Fortune's minion and her pride:
Whilst I, by looking on the praise of him,
See riot and dishonour stain the brow
Of my young Harry. O that it could be proved
That some night-tripping fairy had exchanged
In cradle-clothes our children where they lay,
And call'd mine Percy, his Plantagenet!
Then would I have his Harry, and he mine.
But let him from my thoughts. What think you, coz,
Of this young Percy's pride? the prisoners,
Which he in this adventure hath surprised,
To his own use he keeps
I shall have none but Mordake Earl of Fife.
This is his uncle's teaching
Malevolent to you in all aspects
Which makes him prune himself, and bristle up
The crest of youth against your dignity.
But I have sent for him to answer this
And for this cause awhile we must neglect
Our holy purpose to Jerusalem.
Cousin, on Wednesday next our council we
Will hold at Windsor
But come yourself with speed to us again
For more is to be said and to be done
Than out of anger can be uttered.
I will, my liege.
Exeunt
SCENE II. London. An apartment of the Prince's.
Enter the PRINCE OF WALES and FALSTAFF
Now, Hal, what time of day is it, lad?
Thou art so fat-witted, with drinking of old sack
and unbuttoning thee after supper and sleeping upon
benches after noon, that thou hast forgotten to
demand that truly which thou wouldst truly know.
What a devil hast thou to do with the time of the
day? Unless hours were cups of sack and minutes
capons and clocks the tongues of bawds and dials the
signs of leaping-houses and the blessed sun himself
a fair hot wench in flame-coloured taffeta, I see no
reason why thou shouldst be so superfluous to demand
the time of the day.
Indeed, you come near me now, Hal
purses go by the moon and the seven stars, and not
by Phoebus, he,'that wandering knight so fair.' And,
I prithee, sweet wag, when thou art king, as, God
save thy grace,--majesty I should say, for grace
thou wilt have none,--
What, none?
No, by my troth, not so much as will serve to
prologue to an egg and butter.
Well, how then? come, roundly, roundly.
Marry, then, sweet wag, when thou art king, let not
us that are squires of the night's body be called
thieves of the day's beauty: let us be Diana's
foresters, gentlemen of the shade, minions of the
moon
being governed, as the sea is, by our noble and
chaste mistress the moon, under whose countenance we steal.
Thou sayest well, and it holds well too
fortune of us that are the moon's men doth ebb and
flow like the sea, being governed, as the sea is,
by the moon. As, for proof, now: a purse of gold
most resolutely snatched on Monday night and most
dissolutely spent on Tuesday morning
swearing 'Lay by' and spent with crying 'Bring in
now in as low an ebb as the foot of the ladder
and by and by in as high a flow as the ridge of the gallows.
By the Lord, thou sayest true, lad. And is not my
hostess of the tavern a most sweet wench?
As the honey of Hybla, my old lad of the castle. And
is not a buff jerkin a most sweet robe of durance?
How now, how now, mad wag! what, in thy quips and
thy quiddities? what a plague have I to do with a
buff jerkin?
Why, what a pox have I to do with my hostess of the tavern?
Well, thou hast called her to a reckoning many a
time and oft.
Did I ever call for thee to pay thy part?
No
Yea, and elsewhere, so far as my coin would stretch
and where it would not, I have used my credit.
Yea, and so used it that were it not here apparent
that thou art heir apparent--But, I prithee, sweet
wag, shall there be gallows standing in England when
thou art king? and resolution thus fobbed as it is
with the rusty curb of old father antic the law? Do
not thou, when thou art king, hang a thief.
No
Shall I? O rare! By the Lord, I'll be a brave judge.
Thou judgest false already: I mean, thou shalt have
the hanging of the thieves and so become a rare hangman.
Well, Hal, well
humour as well as waiting in the court, I can tell
you.
For obtaining of suits?
Yea, for obtaining of suits, whereof the hangman
hath no lean wardrobe. 'Sblood, I am as melancholy
as a gib cat or a lugged bear.
Or an old lion, or a lover's lute.
Yea, or the drone of a Lincolnshire bagpipe.
What sayest thou to a hare, or the melancholy of
Moor-ditch?
Thou hast the most unsavoury similes and art indeed
the most comparative, rascalliest, sweet young
prince. But, Hal, I prithee, trouble me no more
with vanity. I would to God thou and I knew where a
commodity of good names were to be bought. An old
lord of the council rated me the other day in the
street about you, sir, but I marked him not
he talked very wisely, but I regarded him not
yet he talked wisely, and in the street too.
Thou didst well
streets, and no man regards it.
O, thou hast damnable iteration and art indeed able
to corrupt a saint. Thou hast done much harm upon
me, Hal
thee, Hal, I knew nothing
should speak truly, little better than one of the
wicked. I must give over this life, and I will give
it over: by the Lord, and I do not, I am a villain:
I'll be damned for never a king's son in
Christendom.
Where shall we take a purse tomorrow, Jack?
'Zounds, where thou wilt, lad
do not, call me villain and baffle me.
I see a good amendment of life in thee
to purse-taking.
Why, Hal, 'tis my vocation, Hal
man to labour in his vocation.
Enter POINS
Poins! Now shall we know if Gadshill have set a
match. O, if men were to be saved by merit, what
hole in hell were hot enough for him? This is the
most omnipotent villain that ever cried 'Stand' to
a true man.
Good morrow, Ned.
Good morrow, sweet Hal. What says Monsieur Remorse?
what says Sir John Sack and Sugar? Jack! how
agrees the devil and thee about thy soul, that thou
soldest him on Good-Friday last for a cup of Madeira
and a cold capon's leg?
Sir John stands to his word, the devil shall have
his bargain
proverbs: he will give the devil his due.
Then art thou damned for keeping thy word with the devil.
Else he had been damned for cozening the devil.
But, my lads, my lads, to-morrow morning, by four
o'clock, early at Gadshill! there are pilgrims going
to Canterbury with rich offerings, and traders
riding to London with fat purses: I have vizards
for you all
Gadshill lies to-night in Rochester: I have bespoke
supper to-morrow night in Eastcheap: we may do it
as secure as sleep. If you will go, I will stuff
your purses full of crowns
at home and be hanged.
Hear ye, Yedward
I'll hang you for going.
You will, chops?
Hal, wilt thou make one?
Who, I rob? I a thief? not I, by my faith.
There's neither honesty, manhood, nor good
fellowship in thee, nor thou camest not of the blood
royal, if thou darest not stand for ten shillings.
Well then, once in my days I'll be a madcap.
Why, that's well said.
Well, come what will, I'll tarry at home.
By the Lord, I'll be a traitor then, when thou art king.
I care not.
Sir John, I prithee, leave the prince and me alone:
I will lay him down such reasons for this adventure
that he shall go.
Well, God give thee the spirit of persuasion and him
the ears of profiting, that what thou speakest may
move and what he hears may be believed, that the
true prince may, for recreation sake, prove a false
thief
countenance. Farewell: you shall find me in Eastcheap.
Farewell, thou latter spring! farewell, All-hallown summer!
Exit Falstaff
Now, my good sweet honey lord, ride with us
to-morrow: I have a jest to execute that I cannot
manage alone. Falstaff, Bardolph, Peto and Gadshill
shall rob those men that we have already waylaid:
yourself and I will not be there
have the booty, if you and I do not rob them, cut
this head off from my shoulders.
How shall we part with them in setting forth?
Why, we will set forth before or after them, and
appoint them a place of meeting, wherein it is at
our pleasure to fail, and then will they adventure
upon the exploit themselves
no sooner achieved, but we'll set upon them.
Yea, but 'tis like that they will know us by our
horses, by our habits and by every other
appointment, to be ourselves.
Tut! our horses they shall not see: I'll tie them
in the wood
leave them: and, sirrah, I have cases of buckram
for the nonce, to immask our noted outward garments.
Yea, but I doubt they will be too hard for us.
Well, for two of them, I know them to be as
true-bred cowards as ever turned back
third, if he fight longer than he sees reason, I'll
forswear arms. The virtue of this jest will be, the
incomprehensible lies that this same fat rogue will
tell us when we meet at supper: how thirty, at
least, he fought with
extremities he endured
lies the jest.
Well, I'll go with thee: provide us all things
necessary and meet me to-morrow night in Eastcheap
there I'll sup. Farewell.
Farewell, my lord.
Exit Poins
I know you all, and will awhile uphold
The unyoked humour of your idleness:
Yet herein will I imitate the sun,
Who doth permit the base contagious clouds
To smother up his beauty from the world,
That, when he please again to be himself,
Being wanted, he may be more wonder'd at,
By breaking through the foul and ugly mists
Of vapours that did seem to strangle him.
If all the year were playing holidays,
To sport would be as tedious as to work
But when they seldom come, they wish'd for come,
And nothing pleaseth but rare accidents.
So, when this loose behavior I throw off
And pay the debt I never promised,
By how much better than my word I am,
By so much shall I falsify men's hopes
And like bright metal on a sullen ground,
My reformation, glittering o'er my fault,
Shall show more goodly and attract more eyes
Than that which hath no foil to set it off.
I'll so offend, to make offence a skill
Redeeming time when men think least I will.
Exit
SCENE III. London. The palace.
Enter the KING, NORTHUMBERLAND, WORCESTER, HOTSPUR, SIR WALTER BLUNT, with others
My blood hath been too cold and temperate,
Unapt to stir at these indignities,
And you have found me
You tread upon my patience: but be sure
I will from henceforth rather be myself,
Mighty and to be fear'd, than my condition
Which hath been smooth as oil, soft as young down,
And therefore lost that title of respect
Which the proud soul ne'er pays but to the proud.
Our house, my sovereign liege, little deserves
The scourge of greatness to be used on it
And that same greatness too which our own hands
Have holp to make so portly.
My lord.--
Worcester, get thee gone
Danger and disobedience in thine eye:
O, sir, your presence is too bold and peremptory,
And majesty might never yet endure
The moody frontier of a servant brow.
You have good leave to leave us: when we need
Your use and counsel, we shall send for you.
Exit Worcester
You were about to speak.
To North
Yea, my good lord.
Those prisoners in your highness' name demanded,
Which Harry Percy here at Holmedon took,
Were, as he says, not with such strength denied
As is deliver'd to your majesty:
Either envy, therefore, or misprison
Is guilty of this fault and not my son.
My liege, I did deny no prisoners.
But I remember, when the fight was done,
When I was dry with rage and extreme toil,
Breathless and faint, leaning upon my sword,
Came there a certain lord, neat, and trimly dress'd,
Fresh as a bridegroom
Show'd like a stubble-land at harvest-home
He was perfumed like a milliner
And 'twixt his finger and his thumb he held
A pouncet-box, which ever and anon
He gave his nose and took't away again
Who therewith angry, when it next came there,
Took it in snuff
And as the soldiers bore dead bodies by,
He call'd them untaught knaves, unmannerly,
To bring a slovenly unhandsome corse
Betwixt the wind and his nobility.
With many holiday and lady terms
He question'd me
My prisoners in your majesty's behalf.
I then, all smarting with my wounds being cold,
To be so pester'd with a popinjay,
Out of my grief and my impatience,
Answer'd neglectingly I know not what,
He should or he should not
To see him shine so brisk and smell so sweet
And talk so like a waiting-gentlewoman
Of guns and drums and wounds,--God save the mark!--
And telling me the sovereign'st thing on earth
Was parmaceti for an inward bruise
And that it was great pity, so it was,
This villanous salt-petre should be digg'd
Out of the bowels of the harmless earth,
Which many a good tall fellow had destroy'd
So cowardly
He would himself have been a soldier.
This bald unjointed chat of his, my lord,
I answer'd indirectly, as I said
And I beseech you, let not his report
Come current for an accusation
Betwixt my love and your high majesty.
The circumstance consider'd, good my lord,
Whate'er Lord Harry Percy then had said
To such a person and in such a place,
At such a time, with all the rest retold,
May reasonably die and never rise
To do him wrong or any way impeach
What then he said, so he unsay it now.
Why, yet he doth deny his prisoners,
But with proviso and exception,
That we at our own charge shall ransom straight
His brother-in-law, the foolish Mortimer
Who, on my soul, hath wilfully betray'd
The lives of those that he did lead to fight
Against that great magician, damn'd Glendower,
Whose daughter, as we hear, the Earl of March
Hath lately married. Shall our coffers, then,
Be emptied to redeem a traitor home?
Shall we but treason? and indent with fears,
When they have lost and forfeited themselves?
No, on the barren mountains let him starve
For I shall never hold that man my friend
Whose tongue shall ask me for one penny cost
To ransom home revolted Mortimer.
Revolted Mortimer!
He never did fall off, my sovereign liege,
But by the chance of war
Needs no more but one tongue for all those wounds,
Those mouthed wounds, which valiantly he took
When on the gentle Severn's sedgy bank,
In single opposition, hand to hand,
He did confound the best part of an hour
In changing hardiment with great Glendower:
Three times they breathed and three times did
they drink,
Upon agreement, of swift Severn's flood
Who then, affrighted with their bloody looks,
Ran fearfully among the trembling reeds,
And hid his crisp head in the hollow bank,
Bloodstained with these valiant combatants.
Never did base and rotten policy
Colour her working with such deadly wounds
Nor could the noble Mortimer
Receive so many, and all willingly:
Then let not him be slander'd with revolt.
Thou dost belie him, Percy, thou dost belie him
He never did encounter with Glendower:
I tell thee,
He durst as well have met the devil alone
As Owen Glendower for an enemy.
Art thou not ashamed? But, sirrah, henceforth
Let me not hear you speak of Mortimer:
Send me your prisoners with the speediest means,
Or you shall hear in such a kind from me
As will displease you. My Lord Northumberland,
We licence your departure with your son.
Send us your prisoners, or you will hear of it.
Exeunt King Henry, Blunt, and train
An if the devil come and roar for them,
I will not send them: I will after straight
And tell him so
Albeit I make a hazard of my head.
What, drunk with choler? stay and pause awhile:
Here comes your uncle.
Re-enter WORCESTER
Speak of Mortimer!
'Zounds, I will speak of him
Want mercy, if I do not join with him:
Yea, on his part I'll empty all these veins,
And shed my dear blood drop by drop in the dust,
But I will lift the down-trod Mortimer
As high in the air as this unthankful king,
As this ingrate and canker'd Bolingbroke.
Brother, the king hath made your nephew mad.
Who struck this heat up after I was gone?
He will, forsooth, have all my prisoners
And when I urged the ransom once again
Of my wife's brother, then his cheek look'd pale,
And on my face he turn'd an eye of death,
Trembling even at the name of Mortimer.
I cannot blame him: was not he proclaim'd
By Richard that dead is the next of blood?
He was
And then it was when the unhappy king,
--Whose wrongs in us God pardon!--did set forth
Upon his Irish expedition
From whence he intercepted did return
To be deposed and shortly murdered.
And for whose death we in the world's wide mouth
Live scandalized and foully spoken of.
But soft, I pray you
Proclaim my brother Edmund Mortimer
Heir to the crown?
He did
Nay, then I cannot blame his cousin king,
That wished him on the barren mountains starve.
But shall it be that you, that set the crown
Upon the head of this forgetful man
And for his sake wear the detested blot
Of murderous subornation, shall it be,
That you a world of curses undergo,
Being the agents, or base second means,
The cords, the ladder, or the hangman rather?
O, pardon me that I descend so low,
To show the line and the predicament
Wherein you range under this subtle king
Shall it for shame be spoken in these days,
Or fill up chronicles in time to come,
That men of your nobility and power
Did gage them both in an unjust behalf,
As both of you--God pardon it!--have done,
To put down Richard, that sweet lovely rose,
An plant this thorn, this canker, Bolingbroke?
And shall it in more shame be further spoken,
That you are fool'd, discarded and shook off
By him for whom these shames ye underwent?
No
Your banish'd honours and restore yourselves
Into the good thoughts of the world again,
Revenge the jeering and disdain'd contempt
Of this proud king, who studies day and night
To answer all the debt he owes to you
Even with the bloody payment of your deaths:
Therefore, I say--
Peace, cousin, say no more:
And now I will unclasp a secret book,
And to your quick-conceiving discontents
I'll read you matter deep and dangerous,
As full of peril and adventurous spirit
As to o'er-walk a current roaring loud
On the unsteadfast footing of a spear.
If he fall in, good night! or sink or swim:
Send danger from the east unto the west,
So honour cross it from the north to south,
And let them grapple: O, the blood more stirs
To rouse a lion than to start a hare!
Imagination of some great exploit
Drives him beyond the bounds of patience.
By heaven, methinks it were an easy leap,
To pluck bright honour from the pale-faced moon,
Or dive into the bottom of the deep,
Where fathom-line could never touch the ground,
And pluck up drowned honour by the locks
So he that doth redeem her thence might wear
Without corrival, all her dignities:
But out upon this half-faced fellowship!
He apprehends a world of figures here,
But not the form of what he should attend.
Good cousin, give me audience for a while.
I cry you mercy.
Those same noble Scots
That are your prisoners,--
I'll keep them all
By God, he shall not have a Scot of them
No, if a Scot would save his soul, he shall not:
I'll keep them, by this hand.
You start away
And lend no ear unto my purposes.
Those prisoners you shall keep.
Nay, I will
He said he would not ransom Mortimer
Forbad my tongue to speak of Mortimer
But I will find him when he lies asleep,
And in his ear I'll holla 'Mortimer!'
Nay,
I'll have a starling shall be taught to speak
Nothing but 'Mortimer,' and give it him
To keep his anger still in motion.
Hear you, cousin
All studies here I solemnly defy,
Save how to gall and pinch this Bolingbroke:
And that same sword-and-buckler Prince of Wales,
But that I think his father loves him not
And would be glad he met with some mischance,
I would have him poison'd with a pot of ale.
Farewell, kinsman: I'll talk to you
When you are better temper'd to attend.
Why, what a wasp-stung and impatient fool
Art thou to break into this woman's mood,
Tying thine ear to no tongue but thine own!
Why, look you, I am whipp'd and scourged with rods,
Nettled and stung with pismires, when I hear
Of this vile politician, Bolingbroke.
In Richard's time,--what do you call the place?--
A plague upon it, it is in Gloucestershire
'Twas where the madcap duke his uncle kept,
His uncle York
Unto this king of smiles, this Bolingbroke,--
'Sblood!--
When you and he came back from Ravenspurgh.
At Berkley castle.
You say true:
Why, what a candy deal of courtesy
This fawning greyhound then did proffer me!
Look,'when his infant fortune came to age,'
And 'gentle Harry Percy,' and 'kind cousin
O, the devil take such cozeners! God forgive me!
Good uncle, tell your tale
Nay, if you have not, to it again
We will stay your leisure.
I have done, i' faith.
Then once more to your Scottish prisoners.
Deliver them up without their ransom straight,
And make the Douglas' son your only mean
For powers in Scotland
Which I shall send you written, be assured,
Will easily be granted. You, my lord,
To Northumberland
Your son in Scotland being thus employ'd,
Shall secretly into the bosom creep
Of that same noble prelate, well beloved,
The archbishop.
Of York, is it not?
True
His brother's death at Bristol, the Lord Scroop.
I speak not this in estimation,
As what I think might be, but what I know
Is ruminated, plotted and set down,
And only stays but to behold the face
Of that occasion that shall bring it on.
I smell it: upon my life, it will do well.
Before the game is afoot, thou still let'st slip.
Why, it cannot choose but be a noble plot
And then the power of Scotland and of York,
To join with Mortimer, ha?
And so they shall.
In faith, it is exceedingly well aim'd.
And 'tis no little reason bids us speed,
To save our heads by raising of a head
For, bear ourselves as even as we can,
The king will always think him in our debt,
And think we think ourselves unsatisfied,
Till he hath found a time to pay us home:
And see already how he doth begin
To make us strangers to his looks of love.
He does, he does: we'll be revenged on him.
Cousin, farewell: no further go in this
Than I by letters shall direct your course.
When time is ripe, which will be suddenly,
I'll steal to Glendower and Lord Mortimer
Where you and Douglas and our powers at once,
As I will fashion it, shall happily meet,
To bear our fortunes in our own strong arms,
Which now we hold at much uncertainty.
Farewell, good brother: we shall thrive, I trust.
Uncle, Adieu: O, let the hours be short
Till fields and blows and groans applaud our sport!
Exeunt
ACT II
SCENE I. Rochester. An inn yard.
Enter a Carrier with a lantern in his hand
Heigh-ho! an it be not four by the day, I'll be
hanged: Charles' wain is over the new chimney, and
yet our horse not packed. What, ostler!
[Within]   Anon, anon.
I prithee, Tom, beat Cut's saddle, put a few flocks
in the point
of all cess.
Enter another Carrier
Peas and beans are as dank here as a dog, and that
is the next way to give poor jades the bots: this
house is turned upside down since Robin Ostler died.
Poor fellow, never joyed since the price of oats
rose
I think this be the most villanous house in all
London road for fleas: I am stung like a tench.
Like a tench! by the mass, there is ne'er a king
christen could be better bit than I have been since
the first cock.
Why, they will allow us ne'er a jordan, and then we
leak in your chimney
fleas like a loach.
What, ostler! come away and be hanged!
I have a gammon of bacon and two razors of ginger,
to be delivered as far as Charing-cross.
God's body! the turkeys in my pannier are quite
starved. What, ostler! A plague on thee! hast thou
never an eye in thy head? canst not hear? An
'twere not as good deed as drink, to break the pate
on thee, I am a very villain. Come, and be hanged!
hast thou no faith in thee?
Enter GADSHILL
Good morrow, carriers. What's o'clock?
I think it be two o'clock.
I pray thee lend me thy lantern, to see my gelding
in the stable.
Nay, by God, soft
I pray thee, lend me thine.
Ay, when? can'st tell? Lend me thy lantern, quoth
he? marry, I'll see thee hanged first.
Sirrah carrier, what time do you mean to come to London?
Time enough to go to bed with a candle, I warrant
thee. Come, neighbour Mugs, we'll call up the
gentleman: they will along with company, for they
have great charge.
Exeunt carriers
What, ho! chamberlain!
[Within]  At hand, quoth pick-purse.
That's even as fair as--at hand, quoth the
chamberlain
of purses than giving direction doth from labouring
thou layest the plot how.
Enter Chamberlain
Good morrow, Master Gadshill. It holds current that
I told you yesternight: there's a franklin in the
wild of Kent hath brought three hundred marks with
him in gold: I heard him tell it to one of his
company last night at supper
that hath abundance of charge too, God knows what.
They are up already, and call for eggs and butter
they will away presently.
Sirrah, if they meet not with Saint Nicholas'
clerks, I'll give thee this neck.
No, I'll none of it: I pray thee keep that for the
hangman
as truly as a man of falsehood may.
What talkest thou to me of the hangman? if I hang,
I'll make a fat pair of gallows
Sir John hangs with me, and thou knowest he is no
starveling. Tut! there are other Trojans that thou
dreamest not of, the which for sport sake are
content to do the profession some grace
if matters should be looked into, for their own
credit sake, make all whole. I am joined with no
foot-land rakers, no long-staff sixpenny strikers,
none of these mad mustachio purple-hued malt-worms
but with nobility and tranquillity, burgomasters and
great oneyers, such as can hold in, such as will
strike sooner than speak, and speak sooner than
drink, and drink sooner than pray: and yet, zounds,
I lie
commonwealth
on her, for they ride up and down on her and make
her their boots.
What, the commonwealth their boots? will she hold
out water in foul way?
She will, she will
steal as in a castle, cocksure
of fern-seed, we walk invisible.
Nay, by my faith, I think you are more beholding to
the night than to fern-seed for your walking invisible.
Give me thy hand: thou shalt have a share in our
purchase, as I am a true man.
Nay, rather let me have it, as you are a false thief.
Go to
ostler bring my gelding out of the stable. Farewell,
you muddy knave.
Exeunt
SCENE II. The highway, near Gadshill.
Enter PRINCE HENRY and POINS
Come, shelter, shelter: I have removed Falstaff's
horse, and he frets like a gummed velvet.
Stand close.
Enter FALSTAFF
Poins! Poins, and be hanged! Poins!
Peace, ye fat-kidneyed rascal! what a brawling dost
thou keep!
Where's Poins, Hal?
He is walked up to the top of the hill: I'll go seek him.
I am accursed to rob in that thief's company: the
rascal hath removed my horse, and tied him I know
not where. If I travel but four foot by the squier
further afoot, I shall break my wind. Well, I doubt
not but to die a fair death for all this, if I
'scape hanging for killing that rogue. I have
forsworn his company hourly any time this two and
twenty years, and yet I am bewitched with the
rogue's company. If the rascal hath not given me
medicines to make me love him, I'll be hanged
could not be else: I have drunk medicines. Poins!
Hal! a plague upon you both! Bardolph! Peto!
I'll starve ere I'll rob a foot further. An 'twere
not as good a deed as drink, to turn true man and to
leave these rogues, I am the veriest varlet that
ever chewed with a tooth. Eight yards of uneven
ground is threescore and ten miles afoot with me
and the stony-hearted villains know it well enough:
a plague upon it when thieves cannot be true one to another!
They whistle
Whew! A plague upon you all! Give me my horse, you
rogues
Peace, ye fat-guts! lie down
to the ground and list if thou canst hear the tread
of travellers.
Have you any levers to lift me up again, being down?
'Sblood, I'll not bear mine own flesh so far afoot
again for all the coin in thy father's exchequer.
What a plague mean ye to colt me thus?
Thou liest
I prithee, good Prince Hal, help me to my horse,
good king's son.
Out, ye rogue! shall I be your ostler?
Go, hang thyself in thine own heir-apparent
garters! If I be ta'en, I'll peach for this. An I
have not ballads made on you all and sung to filthy
tunes, let a cup of sack be my poison: when a jest
is so forward, and afoot too! I hate it.
Enter GADSHILL, BARDOLPH and PETO
Stand.
So I do, against my will.
O, 'tis our setter: I know his voice. Bardolph,
what news?
Case ye, case ye
money of the king's coming down the hill
to the king's exchequer.
You lie, ye rogue
There's enough to make us all.
To be hanged.
Sirs, you four shall front them in the narrow lane
Ned Poins and I will walk lower: if they 'scape
from your encounter, then they light on us.
How many be there of them?
Some eight or ten.
'Zounds, will they not rob us?
What, a coward, Sir John Paunch?
Indeed, I am not John of Gaunt, your grandfather
but yet no coward, Hal.
Well, we leave that to the proof.
Sirrah Jack, thy horse stands behind the hedge:
when thou needest him, there thou shalt find him.
Farewell, and stand fast.
Now cannot I strike him, if I should be hanged.
Ned, where are our disguises?
Here, hard by: stand close.
Exeunt PRINCE HENRY and POINS
Now, my masters, happy man be his dole, say I:
every man to his business.
Enter the Travellers
Come, neighbour: the boy shall lead our horses down
the hill
Stand!
Jesus bless us!
Strike
ah! whoreson caterpillars! bacon-fed knaves! they
hate us youth: down with them: fleece them.
O, we are undone, both we and ours for ever!
Hang ye, gorbellied knaves, are ye undone? No, ye
fat chuffs: I would your store were here! On,
bacons, on! What, ye knaves! young men must live.
You are Grand-jurors, are ye? we'll jure ye, 'faith.
Here they rob them and bind them. Exeunt
Re-enter PRINCE HENRY and POINS
The thieves have bound the true men. Now could thou
and I rob the thieves and go merrily to London, it
would be argument for a week, laughter for a month
and a good jest for ever.
Stand close
Enter the Thieves again
Come, my masters, let us share, and then to  horse
before day. An the Prince and Poins be not two
arrant cowards, there's no equity stirring: there's
no more valour in that Poins than in a wild-duck.
Your money!
Villains!
As they are sharing, the Prince and Poins set upon  them
Got with much ease. Now merrily to horse:
The thieves are all scatter'd and possess'd with fear
So strongly that they dare not meet each other
Each takes his fellow for an officer.
Away, good Ned. Falstaff sweats to death,
And lards the lean earth as he walks along:
Were 't not for laughing, I should pity him.
How the rogue roar'd!
Exeunt
SCENE III. Warkworth castle
Enter HOTSPUR, solus, reading a letter
'But for mine own part, my lord, I could be well
contented to be there, in respect of the love I bear
your house.' He could be contented: why is he not,
then? In respect of the love he bears our house:
he shows in this, he loves his own barn better than
he loves our house. Let me see some more. 'The
purpose you undertake is dangerous
certain: 'tis dangerous to take a cold, to sleep, to
drink
nettle, danger, we pluck this flower, safety. 'The
purpose you undertake is dangerous
have named uncertain
your whole plot too light for the counterpoise of so
great an opposition.' Say you so, say you so? I say
unto you again, you are a shallow cowardly hind, and
you lie.  What a lack-brain is this! By the Lord,
our plot is a good plot as ever was laid
friends true and constant: a good plot, good
friends, and full of expectation
very good friends. What a frosty-spirited rogue is
this! Why, my lord of York commends the plot and the
general course of action. 'Zounds, an I were now by
this rascal, I could brain him with his lady's fan.
Is there not my father, my uncle and myself? lord
Edmund Mortimer, My lord of York and Owen Glendower?
is there not besides the Douglas? have I not all
their letters to meet me in arms by the ninth of the
next month? and are they not some of them set
forward already? What a pagan rascal is this! an
infidel! Ha! you shall see now in very sincerity
of fear and cold heart, will he to the king and lay
open all our proceedings. O, I could divide myself
and go to buffets, for moving such a dish of
skim milk with so honourable an action! Hang him!
let him tell the king: we are prepared. I will set
forward to-night.
Enter LADY PERCY
How now, Kate! I must leave you within these two hours.
O, my good lord, why are you thus alone?
For what offence have I this fortnight been
A banish'd woman from my Harry's bed?
Tell me, sweet lord, what is't that takes from thee
Thy stomach, pleasure and thy golden sleep?
Why dost thou bend thine eyes upon the earth,
And start so often when thou sit'st alone?
Why hast thou lost the fresh blood in thy cheeks
And given my treasures and my rights of thee
To thick-eyed musing and cursed melancholy?
In thy faint slumbers I by thee have watch'd,
And heard thee murmur tales of iron wars
Speak terms of manage to thy bounding steed
Cry 'Courage! to the field!' And thou hast talk'd
Of sallies and retires, of trenches, tents,
Of palisadoes, frontiers, parapets,
Of basilisks, of cannon, culverin,
Of prisoners' ransom and of soldiers slain,
And all the currents of a heady fight.
Thy spirit within thee hath been so at war
And thus hath so bestirr'd thee in thy sleep,
That beads of sweat have stood upon thy brow
Like bubbles in a late-disturbed stream
And in thy face strange motions have appear'd,
Such as we see when men restrain their breath
On some great sudden hest. O, what portents are these?
Some heavy business hath my lord in hand,
And I must know it, else he loves me not.
What, ho!
Enter Servant
Is Gilliams with the packet gone?
He is, my lord, an hour ago.
Hath Butler brought those horses from the sheriff?
One horse, my lord, he brought even now.
What horse? a roan, a crop-ear, is it not?
It is, my lord.
That roan shall by my throne.
Well, I will back him straight: O esperance!
Bid Butler lead him forth into the park.
Exit Servant
But hear you, my lord.
What say'st thou, my lady?
What is it carries you away?
Why, my horse, my love, my horse.
Out, you mad-headed ape!
A weasel hath not such a deal of spleen
As you are toss'd with. In faith,
I'll know your business, Harry, that I will.
I fear my brother Mortimer doth stir
About his title, and hath sent for you
To line his enterprise: but if you go,--
So far afoot, I shall be weary, love.
Come, come, you paraquito, answer me
Directly unto this question that I ask:
In faith, I'll break thy little finger, Harry,
An if thou wilt not tell me all things true.
Away,
Away, you trifler! Love! I love thee not,
I care not for thee, Kate: this is no world
To play with mammets and to tilt with lips:
We must have bloody noses and crack'd crowns,
And pass them current too. God's me, my horse!
What say'st thou, Kate? what would'st thou
have with me?
Do you not love me? do you not, indeed?
Well, do not then
I will not love myself. Do you not love me?
Nay, tell me if you speak in jest or no.
Come, wilt thou see me ride?
And when I am on horseback, I will swear
I love thee infinitely. But hark you, Kate
I must not have you henceforth question me
Whither I go, nor reason whereabout:
Whither I must, I must
This evening must I leave you, gentle Kate.
I know you wise, but yet no farther wise
Than Harry Percy's wife: constant you are,
But yet a woman: and for secrecy,
No lady closer
Thou wilt not utter what thou dost not know
And so far will I trust thee, gentle Kate.
How! so far?
Not an inch further. But hark you, Kate:
Whither I go, thither shall you go too
To-day will I set forth, to-morrow you.
Will this content you, Kate?
It must of force.
Exeunt
SCENE IV. The Boar's-Head Tavern, Eastcheap.
Enter PRINCE HENRY and POINS
Ned, prithee, come out of that fat room, and lend me
thy hand to laugh a little.
Where hast been, Hal?
With three or four loggerheads amongst three or four
score hogsheads. I have sounded the very
base-string of humility. Sirrah, I am sworn brother
to a leash of drawers
their christen names, as Tom, Dick, and Francis.
They take it already upon their salvation, that
though I be but the prince of Wales, yet I am king
of courtesy
like Falstaff, but a Corinthian, a lad of mettle, a
good boy, by the Lord, so they call me, and when I
am king of England, I shall command all the good
lads in Eastcheap. They call drinking deep, dyeing
scarlet
cry  'hem!' and bid you play it off. To conclude, I
am so good a proficient in one quarter of an hour,
that I can drink with any tinker in his own language
during my life. I tell thee, Ned, thou hast lost
much honour, that thou wert not with me in this sweet
action. But, sweet Ned,--to sweeten which name of
Ned, I give thee this pennyworth of sugar, clapped
even now into my hand by an under-skinker, one that
never spake other English in his life than 'Eight
shillings and sixpence' and 'You are welcome,' with
this shrill addition, 'Anon, anon, sir! Score a pint
of bastard in the Half-Moon,' or so. But, Ned, to
drive away the time till Falstaff come, I prithee,
do thou stand in some by-room, while I question my
puny drawer to what end he gave me the sugar
thou never leave calling 'Francis,' that his tale
to me may be nothing but 'Anon.' Step aside, and
I'll show thee a precedent.
Francis!
Thou art perfect.
Francis!
Exit POINS
Enter FRANCIS
Anon, anon, sir. Look down into the Pomgarnet, Ralph.
Come hither, Francis.
My lord?
How long hast thou to serve, Francis?
Forsooth, five years, and as much as to--
[Within]  Francis!
Anon, anon, sir.
Five year! by'r lady, a long lease for the clinking
of pewter. But, Francis, darest thou be so valiant
as to play the coward with thy indenture and show it
a fair pair of heels and run from it?
O Lord, sir, I'll be sworn upon all the books in
England, I could find in my heart.
[Within]  Francis!
Anon, sir.
How old art thou, Francis?
Let me see--about Michaelmas next I shall be--
[Within]  Francis!
Anon, sir. Pray stay a little, my lord.
Nay, but hark you, Francis: for the sugar thou
gavest me,'twas a pennyworth, wast't not?
O Lord, I would it had been two!
I will give thee for it a thousand pound: ask me
when thou wilt, and thou shalt have it.
[Within]  Francis!
Anon, anon.
Anon, Francis? No, Francis
or, Francis, o' Thursday
thou wilt. But, Francis!
My lord?
Wilt thou rob this leathern jerkin, crystal-button,
not-pated, agate-ring, puke-stocking, caddis-garter,
smooth-tongue, Spanish-pouch,--
O Lord, sir, who do you mean?
Why, then, your brown bastard is your only drink
for look you, Francis, your white canvas doublet
will sully: in Barbary, sir, it cannot come to so much.
What, sir?
[Within]  Francis!
Away, you rogue! dost thou not hear them call?
Here they both call him
Enter Vintner
What, standest thou still, and hearest such a
calling? Look to the guests within.
Exit Francis
My lord, old Sir John, with half-a-dozen more, are
at the door: shall I let them in?
Let them alone awhile, and then open the door.
Exit Vintner
Poins!
Re-enter POINS
Anon, anon, sir.
Sirrah, Falstaff and the rest of the thieves are at
the door: shall we be merry?
As merry as crickets, my lad. But hark ye
cunning match have you made with this jest of the
drawer? come, what's the issue?
I am now of all humours that have showed themselves
humours since the old days of goodman Adam to the
pupil age of this present twelve o'clock at midnight.
Re-enter FRANCIS
What's o'clock, Francis?
Anon, anon, sir.
Exit
That ever this fellow should have fewer words than a
parrot, and yet the son of a woman! His industry is
upstairs and downstairs
a reckoning. I am not yet of Percy's mind, the
Hotspur of the north
seven dozen of Scots at a breakfast, washes his
hands, and says to his wife 'Fie upon this quiet
life! I want work.' 'O my sweet Harry,' says she,
'how many hast thou killed to-day?' 'Give my roan
horse a drench,' says he
fourteen,' an hour after
prithee, call in Falstaff: I'll play Percy, and
that damned brawn shall play Dame Mortimer his
wife. 'Rivo!' says the drunkard. Call in ribs, call in tallow.
Enter FALSTAFF, GADSHILL, BARDOLPH, and PETO
Welcome, Jack: where hast thou been?
A plague of all cowards, I say, and a vengeance too!
marry, and amen! Give me a cup of sack, boy. Ere I
lead this life long, I'll sew nether stocks and mend
them and foot them too. A plague of all cowards!
Give me a cup of sack, rogue. Is there no virtue extant?
He drinks
Didst thou never see Titan kiss a dish of butter?
pitiful-hearted Titan, that melted at the sweet tale
of the sun's! if thou didst, then behold that compound.
You rogue, here's lime in this sack too: there is
nothing but roguery to be found in villanous man:
yet a coward is worse than a cup of sack with lime
in it. A villanous coward! Go thy ways, old Jack
die when thou wilt, if manhood, good manhood, be
not forgot upon the face of the earth, then am I a
shotten herring. There live not three good men
unhanged in England
grows old: God help the while! a bad world, I say.
I would I were a weaver
thing. A plague of all cowards, I say still.
How now, wool-sack! what mutter you?
A king's son! If I do not beat thee out of thy
kingdom with a dagger of lath, and drive all thy
subjects afore thee like a flock of wild-geese,
I'll never wear hair on my face more. You Prince of Wales!
Why, you whoreson round man, what's the matter?
Are not you a coward? answer me to that: and Poins there?
'Zounds, ye fat paunch, an ye call me coward, by the
Lord, I'll stab thee.
I call thee coward! I'll see thee damned ere I call
thee coward: but I would give a thousand pound I
could run as fast as thou canst. You are straight
enough in the shoulders, you care not who sees your
back: call you that backing of your friends? A
plague upon such backing! give me them that will
face me. Give me a cup of sack: I am a rogue, if I
drunk to-day.
O villain! thy lips are scarce wiped since thou
drunkest last.
All's one for that.
He drinks
A plague of all cowards, still say I.
What's the matter?
What's the matter! there be four of us here have
ta'en a thousand pound this day morning.
Where is it, Jack? where is it?
Where is it! taken from us it is: a hundred upon
poor four of us.
What, a hundred, man?
I am a rogue, if I were not at half-sword with a
dozen of them two hours together. I have 'scaped by
miracle. I am eight times thrust through the
doublet, four through the hose
through and through
hand-saw--ecce signum! I never dealt better since
I was a man: all would not do. A plague of all
cowards! Let them speak: if they speak more or
less than truth, they are villains and the sons of darkness.
Speak, sirs
We four set upon some dozen--
Sixteen at least, my lord.
And bound them.
No, no, they were not bound.
You rogue, they were bound, every man of them
am a Jew else, an Ebrew Jew.
As we were sharing, some six or seven fresh men set upon us--
And unbound the rest, and then come in the other.
What, fought you with them all?
All! I know not what you call all
not with fifty of them, I am a bunch of radish: if
there were not two or three and fifty upon poor old
Jack, then am I no two-legged creature.
Pray God you have not murdered some of them.
Nay, that's past praying for: I have peppered two
of them
in buckram suits. I tell thee what, Hal, if I tell
thee a lie, spit in my face, call me horse. Thou
knowest my old ward
point. Four rogues in buckram let drive at me--
What, four? thou saidst but two even now.
Four, Hal
Ay, ay, he said four.
These four came all a-front, and mainly thrust at
me. I made me no more ado but took all their seven
points in my target, thus.
Seven? why, there were but four even now.
In buckram?
Ay, four, in buckram suits.
Seven, by these hilts, or I am a villain else.
Prithee, let him alone
Dost thou hear me, Hal?
Ay, and mark thee too, Jack.
Do so, for it is worth the listening to. These nine
in buckram that I told thee of--
So, two more already.
Their points being broken,--
Down fell their hose.
Began to give me ground: but I followed me close,
came in foot and hand
the eleven I paid.
O monstrous! eleven buckram men grown out of two!
But, as the devil would have it, three misbegotten
knaves in Kendal green came at my back and let drive
at me
not see thy hand.
These lies are like their father that begets them
gross as a mountain, open, palpable. Why, thou
clay-brained guts, thou knotty-pated fool, thou
whoreson, obscene, grease tallow-catch,--
What, art thou mad? art thou mad? is not the truth
the truth?
Why, how couldst thou know these men in Kendal
green, when it was so dark thou couldst not see thy
hand? come, tell us your reason: what sayest thou to this?
Come, your reason, Jack, your reason.
What, upon compulsion? 'Zounds, an I were at the
strappado, or all the racks in the world, I would
not tell you on compulsion. Give you a reason on
compulsion! If reasons were as plentiful as
blackberries, I would give no man a reason upon
compulsion, I.
I'll be no longer guilty of this sin
coward, this bed-presser, this horseback-breaker,
this huge hill of flesh,--
'Sblood, you starveling, you elf-skin, you dried
neat's tongue, you bull's pizzle, you stock-fish! O
for breath to utter what is like thee! you
tailor's-yard, you sheath, you bowcase
standing-tuck,--
Well, breathe awhile, and then to it again: and
when thou hast tired thyself in base comparisons,
hear me speak but this.
Mark, Jack.
We two saw you four set on four and bound them, and
were masters of their wealth. Mark now, how a plain
tale shall put you down. Then did we two set on you
four
prize, and have it
the house: and, Falstaff, you carried your guts
away as nimbly, with as quick dexterity, and roared
for mercy and still run and roared, as ever I heard
bull-calf. What a slave art thou, to hack thy sword
as thou hast done, and then say it was in fight!
What trick, what device, what starting-hole, canst
thou now find out to hide thee from this open and
apparent shame?
Come, let's hear, Jack
By the Lord, I knew ye as well as he that made ye.
Why, hear you, my masters: was it for me to kill the
heir-apparent? should I turn upon the true prince?
why, thou knowest I am as valiant as Hercules: but
beware instinct
prince. Instinct is a great matter
coward on instinct. I shall think the better of
myself and thee during my life
lion, and thou for a true prince. But, by the Lord,
lads, I am glad you have the money. Hostess, clap
to the doors: watch to-night, pray to-morrow.
Gallants, lads, boys, hearts of gold, all the titles
of good fellowship come to you! What, shall we be
merry? shall we have a play extempore?
Content
Ah, no more of that, Hal, an thou lovest me!
Enter Hostess
O Jesu, my lord the prince!
How now, my lady the hostess! what sayest thou to
me?
Marry, my lord, there is a nobleman of the court at
door would speak with you: he says he comes from
your father.
Give him as much as will make him a royal man, and
send him back again to my mother.
What manner of man is he?
An old man.
What doth gravity out of his bed at midnight? Shall
I give him his answer?
Prithee, do, Jack.
'Faith, and I'll send him packing.
Exit FALSTAFF
Now, sirs: by'r lady, you fought fair
Peto
ran away upon instinct, you will not touch the true
prince
'Faith, I ran when I saw others run.
'Faith, tell me now in earnest, how came Falstaff's
sword so hacked?
Why, he hacked it with his dagger, and said he would
swear truth out of England but he would make you
believe it was done in fight, and persuaded us to do the like.
Yea, and to tickle our noses with spear-grass to
make them bleed, and then to beslubber our garments
with it and swear it was the blood of true men. I
did that I did not this seven year before, I blushed
to hear his monstrous devices.
O villain, thou stolest a cup of sack eighteen years
ago, and wert taken with the manner, and ever since
thou hast blushed extempore. Thou hadst fire and
sword on thy side, and yet thou rannest away: what
instinct hadst thou for it?
My lord, do you see these meteors? do you behold
these exhalations?
I do.
What think you they portend?
Hot livers and cold purses.
Choler, my lord, if rightly taken.
No, if rightly taken, halter.
Re-enter FALSTAFF
Here comes lean Jack, here comes bare-bone.
How now, my sweet creature of bombast!
How long is't ago, Jack, since thou sawest thine own knee?
My own knee! when I was about thy years, Hal, I was
not an eagle's talon in the waist
crept into any alderman's thumb-ring: a plague of
sighing and grief! it blows a man up like a
bladder. There's villanous news abroad: here was
Sir John Bracy from your father
court in the morning. That same mad fellow of the
north, Percy, and he of Wales, that gave Amamon the
bastinado and made Lucifer cuckold and swore the
devil his true liegeman upon the cross of a Welsh
hook--what a plague call you him?
O, Glendower.
Owen, Owen, the same
and old Northumberland, and that sprightly Scot of
Scots, Douglas, that runs o' horseback up a hill
perpendicular,--
He that rides at high speed and with his pistol
kills a sparrow flying.
You have hit it.
So did he never the sparrow.
Well, that rascal hath good mettle in him
Why, what a rascal art thou then, to praise him so
for running!
O' horseback, ye cuckoo
Yes, Jack, upon instinct.
I grant ye, upon instinct. Well, he is there too,
and one Mordake, and a thousand blue-caps more:
Worcester is stolen away to-night
beard is turned white with the news: you may buy
land now as cheap as stinking mackerel.
Why, then, it is like, if there come a hot June and
this civil buffeting hold, we shall buy maidenheads
as they buy hob-nails, by the hundreds.
By the mass, lad, thou sayest true
shall have good trading that way. But tell me, Hal,
art not thou horrible afeard? thou being
heir-apparent, could the world pick thee out three
such enemies again as that fiend Douglas, that
spirit Percy, and that devil Glendower? Art thou
not horribly afraid? doth not thy blood thrill at
it?
Not a whit, i' faith
Well, thou wert be horribly chid tomorrow when thou
comest to thy father: if thou love me, practise an answer.
Do thou stand for my father, and examine me upon the
particulars of my life.
Shall I? content: this chair shall be my state,
this dagger my sceptre, and this cushion my crown.
Thy state is taken for a joined-stool, thy golden
sceptre for a leaden dagger, and thy precious rich
crown for a pitiful bald crown!
Well, an the fire of grace be not quite out of thee,
now shalt thou be moved. Give me a cup of sack to
make my eyes look red, that it may be thought I have
wept
in King Cambyses' vein.
Well, here is my leg.
And here is my speech. Stand aside, nobility.
O Jesu, this is excellent sport, i' faith!
Weep not, sweet queen
O, the father, how he holds his countenance!
For God's sake, lords, convey my tristful queen
For tears do stop the flood-gates of her eyes.
O Jesu, he doth it as like one of these harlotry
players as ever I see!
Peace, good pint-pot
Harry, I do not only marvel where thou spendest thy
time, but also how thou art accompanied: for though
the camomile, the more it is trodden on the faster
it grows, yet youth, the more it is wasted the
sooner it wears. That thou art my son, I have
partly thy mother's word, partly my own opinion,
but chiefly a villanous trick of thine eye and a
foolish-hanging of thy nether lip, that doth warrant
me. If then thou be son to me, here lies the point
why, being son to me, art thou so pointed at? Shall
the blessed sun of heaven prove a micher and eat
blackberries? a question not to be asked. Shall
the sun of England prove a thief and take purses? a
question to be asked. There is a thing, Harry,
which thou hast often heard of and it is known to
many in our land by the name of pitch: this pitch,
as ancient writers do report, doth defile
the company thou keepest: for, Harry, now I do not
speak to thee in drink but in tears, not in
pleasure but in passion, not in words only, but in
woes also: and yet there is a virtuous man whom I
have often noted in thy company, but I know not his name.
What manner of man, an it like your majesty?
A goodly portly man, i' faith, and a corpulent
cheerful look, a pleasing eye and a most noble
carriage
by'r lady, inclining to three score
remember me, his name is Falstaff: if that man
should be lewdly given, he deceiveth me
I see virtue in his looks. If then the tree may be
known by the fruit, as the fruit by the tree, then,
peremptorily I speak it, there is virtue in that
Falstaff: him keep with, the rest banish. And tell
me now, thou naughty varlet, tell me, where hast
thou been this month?
Dost thou speak like a king? Do thou stand for me,
and I'll play my father.
Depose me? if thou dost it half so gravely, so
majestically, both in word and matter, hang me up by
the heels for a rabbit-sucker or a poulter's hare.
Well, here I am set.
And here I stand: judge, my masters.
Now, Harry, whence come you?
My noble lord, from Eastcheap.
The complaints I hear of thee are grievous.
'Sblood, my lord, they are false: nay, I'll tickle
ye for a young prince, i' faith.
Swearest thou, ungracious boy? henceforth ne'er look
on me. Thou art violently carried away from grace:
there is a devil haunts thee in the likeness of an
old fat man
dost thou converse with that trunk of humours, that
bolting-hutch of beastliness, that swollen parcel
of dropsies, that huge bombard of sack, that stuffed
cloak-bag of guts, that roasted Manningtree ox with
the pudding in his belly, that reverend vice, that
grey iniquity, that father ruffian, that vanity in
years? Wherein is he good, but to taste sack and
drink it? wherein neat and cleanly, but to carve a
capon and eat it? wherein cunning, but in craft?
wherein crafty, but in villany? wherein villanous,
but in all things? wherein worthy, but in nothing?
I would your grace would take me with you: whom
means your grace?
That villanous abominable misleader of youth,
Falstaff, that old white-bearded Satan.
My lord, the man I know.
I know thou dost.
But to say I know more harm in him than in myself,
were to say more than I know. That he is old, the
more the pity, his white hairs do witness it
that he is, saving your reverence, a whoremaster,
that I utterly deny. If sack and sugar be a fault,
God help the wicked! if to be old and merry be a
sin, then many an old host that I know is damned: if
to be fat be to be hated, then Pharaoh's lean kine
are to be loved. No, my good lord
banish Bardolph, banish Poins: but for sweet Jack
Falstaff, kind Jack Falstaff, true Jack Falstaff,
valiant Jack Falstaff, and therefore more valiant,
being, as he is, old Jack Falstaff, banish not him
thy Harry's company, banish not him thy Harry's
company: banish plump Jack, and banish all the world.
I do, I will.
A knocking heard
Exeunt Hostess, FRANCIS, and BARDOLPH
Re-enter BARDOLPH, running
O, my lord, my lord! the sheriff with a most
monstrous watch is at the door.
Out, ye rogue! Play out the play: I have much to
say in the behalf of that Falstaff.
Re-enter the Hostess
O Jesu, my lord, my lord!
Heigh, heigh! the devil rides upon a fiddlestick:
what's the matter?
The sheriff and all the watch are at the door: they
are come to search the house. Shall I let them in?
Dost thou hear, Hal? never call a true piece of
gold a counterfeit: thou art essentially mad,
without seeming so.
And thou a natural coward, without instinct.
I deny your major: if you will deny the sheriff,
so
as well as another man, a plague on my bringing up!
I hope I shall as soon be strangled with a halter as another.
Go, hide thee behind the arras: the rest walk up
above. Now, my masters, for a true face and good
conscience.
Both which I have had: but their date is out, and
therefore I'll hide me.
Call in the sheriff.
Exeunt all except PRINCE HENRY and PETO
Enter Sheriff and the Carrier
Now, master sheriff, what is your will with me?
First, pardon me, my lord. A hue and cry
Hath follow'd certain men unto this house.
What men?
One of them is well known, my gracious lord,
A gross fat man.
As fat as butter.
The man, I do assure you, is not here
For I myself at this time have employ'd him.
And, sheriff, I will engage my word to thee
That I will, by to-morrow dinner-time,
Send him to answer thee, or any man,
For any thing he shall be charged withal:
And so let me entreat you leave the house.
I will, my lord. There are two gentlemen
Have in this robbery lost three hundred marks.
It may be so: if he have robb'd these men,
He shall be answerable
Good night, my noble lord.
I think it is good morrow, is it not?
Indeed, my lord, I think it be two o'clock.
Exeunt Sheriff and Carrier
This oily rascal is known as well as Paul's. Go,
call him forth.
Falstaff!--Fast asleep behind the arras, and
snorting like a horse.
Hark, how hard he fetches breath. Search his pockets.
He searcheth his pockets, and findeth certain papers
What hast thou found?
Nothing but papers, my lord.
Let's see what they be: read them.
[Reads]  Item, A capon,. . 2s. 2d.
Item, Sauce,. . . 4d.
Item, Sack, two gallons, 5s. 8d.
Item, Anchovies and sack after supper, 2s. 6d.
Item, Bread,        ob.
O monstrous! but one half-penny-worth of bread to
this intolerable deal of sack! What there is else,
keep close
let him sleep till day. I'll to the court in the
morning. We must all to the wars, and thy place
shall be honourable. I'll procure this fat rogue a
charge of foot
march of twelve-score. The money shall be paid
back again with advantage. Be with me betimes in
the morning
Exeunt
Good morrow, good my lord.
ACT III
SCENE I. Bangor. The Archdeacon's house.
Enter HOTSPUR, WORCESTER, MORTIMER, and GLENDOWER
These promises are fair, the parties sure,
And our induction full of prosperous hope.
Lord Mortimer, and cousin Glendower,
Will you sit down?
And uncle Worcester: a plague upon it!
I have forgot the map.
No, here it is.
Sit, cousin Percy
For by that name as oft as Lancaster
Doth speak of you, his cheek looks pale and with
A rising sigh he wisheth you in heaven.
And you in hell, as oft as he hears Owen Glendower spoke of.
I cannot blame him: at my nativity
The front of heaven was full of fiery shapes,
Of burning cressets
The frame and huge foundation of the earth
Shaked like a coward.
Why, so it would have done at the same season, if
your mother's cat had but kittened, though yourself
had never been born.
I say the earth did shake when I was born.
And I say the earth was not of my mind,
If you suppose as fearing you it shook.
The heavens were all on fire, the earth did tremble.
O, then the earth shook to see the heavens on fire,
And not in fear of your nativity.
Diseased nature oftentimes breaks forth
In strange eruptions
Is with a kind of colic pinch'd and vex'd
By the imprisoning of unruly wind
Within her womb
Shakes the old beldam earth and topples down
Steeples and moss-grown towers. At your birth
Our grandam earth, having this distemperature,
In passion shook.
Cousin, of many men
I do not bear these crossings. Give me leave
To tell you once again that at my birth
The front of heaven was full of fiery shapes,
The goats ran from the mountains, and the herds
Were strangely clamorous to the frighted fields.
These signs have mark'd me extraordinary
And all the courses of my life do show
I am not in the roll of common men.
Where is he living, clipp'd in with the sea
That chides the banks of England, Scotland, Wales,
Which calls me pupil, or hath read to me?
And bring him out that is but woman's son
Can trace me in the tedious ways of art
And hold me pace in deep experiments.
I think there's no man speaks better Welsh.
I'll to dinner.
Peace, cousin Percy
I can call spirits from the vasty deep.
Why, so can I, or so can any man
But will they come when you do call for them?
Why, I can teach you, cousin, to command
The devil.
And I can teach thee, coz, to shame the devil
By telling truth: tell truth and shame the devil.
If thou have power to raise him, bring him hither,
And I'll be sworn I have power to shame him hence.
O, while you live, tell truth and shame the devil!
Come, come, no more of this unprofitable chat.
Three times hath Henry Bolingbroke made head
Against my power
And sandy-bottom'd Severn have I sent him
Bootless home and weather-beaten back.
Home without boots, and in foul weather too!
How 'scapes he agues, in the devil's name?
Come, here's the map: shall we divide our right
According to our threefold order ta'en?
The archdeacon hath divided it
Into three limits very equally:
England, from Trent and Severn hitherto,
By south and east is to my part assign'd:
All westward, Wales beyond the Severn shore,
And all the fertile land within that bound,
To Owen Glendower: and, dear coz, to you
The remnant northward, lying off from Trent.
And our indentures tripartite are drawn
Which being sealed interchangeably,
A business that this night may execute,
To-morrow, cousin Percy, you and I
And my good Lord of Worcester will set forth
To meet your father and the Scottish power,
As is appointed us, at Shrewsbury.
My father Glendower is not ready yet,
Not shall we need his help these fourteen days.
Within that space you may have drawn together
Your tenants, friends and neighbouring gentlemen.
A shorter time shall send me to you, lords:
And in my conduct shall your ladies come
From whom you now must steal and take no leave,
For there will be a world of water shed
Upon the parting of your wives and you.
Methinks my moiety, north from Burton here,
In quantity equals not one of yours:
See how this river comes me cranking in,
And cuts me from the best of all my land
A huge half-moon, a monstrous cantle out.
I'll have the current in this place damm'd up
And here the smug and silver Trent shall run
In a new channel, fair and evenly
It shall not wind with such a deep indent,
To rob me of so rich a bottom here.
Not wind? it shall, it must
Yea, but
Mark how he bears his course, and runs me up
With like advantage on the other side
Gelding the opposed continent as much
As on the other side it takes from you.
Yea, but a little charge will trench him here
And on this north side win this cape of land
And then he runs straight and even.
I'll have it so: a little charge will do it.
I'll not have it alter'd.
Will not you?
No, nor you shall not.
Who shall say me nay?
Why, that will I.
Let me not understand you, then
I can speak English, lord, as well as you
For I was train'd up in the English court
Where, being but young, I framed to the harp
Many an English ditty lovely well
And gave the tongue a helpful ornament,
A virtue that was never seen in you.
Marry,
And I am glad of it with all my heart:
I had rather be a kitten and cry mew
Than one of these same metre ballad-mongers
I had rather hear a brazen canstick turn'd,
Or a dry wheel grate on the axle-tree
And that would set my teeth nothing on edge,
Nothing so much as mincing poetry:
'Tis like the forced gait of a shuffling nag.
Come, you shall have Trent turn'd.
I do not care: I'll give thrice so much land
To any well-deserving friend
But in the way of bargain, mark ye me,
I'll cavil on the ninth part of a hair.
Are the indentures drawn? shall we be gone?
The moon shines fair
I'll haste the writer and withal
Break with your wives of your departure hence:
I am afraid my daughter will run mad,
So much she doteth on her Mortimer.
Exit GLENDOWER
Fie, cousin Percy! how you cross my father!
I cannot choose: sometime he angers me
With telling me of the mouldwarp and the ant,
Of the dreamer Merlin and his prophecies,
And of a dragon and a finless fish,
A clip-wing'd griffin and a moulten raven,
A couching lion and a ramping cat,
And such a deal of skimble-skamble stuff
As puts me from my faith. I tell you what
He held me last night at least nine hours
In reckoning up the several devils' names
That were his lackeys: I cried 'hum,' and 'well, go to,'
But mark'd him not a word. O, he is as tedious
As a tired horse, a railing wife
Worse than a smoky house: I had rather live
With cheese and garlic in a windmill, far,
Than feed on cates and have him talk to me
In any summer-house in Christendom.
In faith, he is a worthy gentleman,
Exceedingly well read, and profited
In strange concealments, valiant as a lion
And as wondrous affable and as bountiful
As mines of India. Shall I tell you, cousin?
He holds your temper in a high respect
And curbs himself even of his natural scope
When you come 'cross his humour
I warrant you, that man is not alive
Might so have tempted him as you have done,
Without the taste of danger and reproof:
But do not use it oft, let me entreat you.
In faith, my lord, you are too wilful-blame
And since your coming hither have done enough
To put him quite beside his patience.
You must needs learn, lord, to amend this fault:
Though sometimes it show greatness, courage, blood,--
And that's the dearest grace it renders you,--
Yet oftentimes it doth present harsh rage,
Defect of manners, want of government,
Pride, haughtiness, opinion and disdain:
The least of which haunting a nobleman
Loseth men's hearts and leaves behind a stain
Upon the beauty of all parts besides,
Beguiling them of commendation.
Well, I am school'd: good manners be your speed!
Here come our wives, and let us take our leave.
Re-enter GLENDOWER with the ladies
This is the deadly spite that angers me
My wife can speak no English, I no Welsh.
My daughter weeps: she will not part with you
She'll be a soldier too, she'll to the wars.
Good father, tell her that she and my aunt Percy
Shall follow in your conduct speedily.
Glendower speaks to her in Welsh, and she answers him in the same
She is desperate here
one that no persuasion can do good upon.
The lady speaks in Welsh
I understand thy looks: that pretty Welsh
Which thou pour'st down from these swelling heavens
I am too perfect in
In such a parley should I answer thee.
The lady speaks again in Welsh
I understand thy kisses and thou mine,
And that's a feeling disputation:
But I will never be a truant, love,
Till I have learned thy language
Makes Welsh as sweet as ditties highly penn'd,
Sung by a fair queen in a summer's bower,
With ravishing division, to her lute.
Nay, if you melt, then will she run mad.
The lady speaks again in Welsh
O, I am ignorance itself in this!
She bids you on the wanton rushes lay you down
And rest your gentle head upon her lap,
And she will sing the song that pleaseth you
And on your eyelids crown the god of sleep.
Charming your blood with pleasing heaviness,
Making such difference 'twixt wake and sleep
As is the difference betwixt day and night
The hour before the heavenly-harness'd team
Begins his golden progress in the east.
With all my heart I'll sit and hear her sing:
By that time will our book, I think, be drawn
Do so
And those musicians that shall play to you
Hang in the air a thousand leagues from hence,
And straight they shall be here: sit, and attend.
Come, Kate, thou art perfect in lying down: come,
quick, quick, that I may lay my head in thy lap.
Go, ye giddy goose.
The music plays
Now I perceive the devil understands Welsh
And 'tis no marvel he is so humorous.
By'r lady, he is a good musician.
Then should you be nothing but musical for you are
altogether governed by humours. Lie still, ye thief,
and hear the lady sing in Welsh.
I had rather hear Lady, my brach, howl in Irish.
Wouldst thou have thy head broken?
No.
Then be still.
Neither
Now God help thee!
To the Welsh lady's bed.
What's that?
Peace! she sings.
Here the lady sings a Welsh song
Come, Kate, I'll have your song too.
Not mine, in good sooth.
Not yours, in good sooth! Heart! you swear like a
comfit-maker's wife. 'Not you, in good sooth,' and
'as true as I live,' and 'as God shall mend me,' and
'as sure as day,'
And givest such sarcenet surety for thy oaths,
As if thou never walk'st further than Finsbury.
Swear me, Kate, like a lady as thou art,
A good mouth-filling oath, and leave 'in sooth,'
And such protest of pepper-gingerbread,
To velvet-guards and Sunday-citizens.
Come, sing.
I will not sing.
'Tis the next way to turn tailor, or be red-breast
teacher. An the indentures be drawn, I'll away
within these two hours
Exit
Come, come, Lord Mortimer
As hot Lord Percy is on fire to go.
By this our book is drawn
And then to horse immediately.
With all my heart.
Exeunt
SCENE II. London. The palace.
Enter KING HENRY IV, PRINCE HENRY, and others
Lords, give us leave
Must have some private conference
For we shall presently have need of you.
Exeunt Lords
I know not whether God will have it so,
For some displeasing service I have done,
That, in his secret doom, out of my blood
He'll breed revengement and a scourge for me
But thou dost in thy passages of life
Make me believe that thou art only mark'd
For the hot vengeance and the rod of heaven
To punish my mistreadings. Tell me else,
Could such inordinate and low desires,
Such poor, such bare, such lewd, such mean attempts,
Such barren pleasures, rude society,
As thou art match'd withal and grafted to,
Accompany the greatness of thy blood
And hold their level with thy princely heart?
So please your majesty, I would I could
Quit all offences with as clear excuse
As well as I am doubtless I can purge
Myself of many I am charged withal:
Yet such extenuation let me beg,
As, in reproof of many tales devised,
which oft the ear of greatness needs must hear,
By smiling pick-thanks and base news-mongers,
I may, for some things true, wherein my youth
Hath faulty wander'd and irregular,
Find pardon on my true submission.
God pardon thee! yet let me wonder, Harry,
At thy affections, which do hold a wing
Quite from the flight of all thy ancestors.
Thy place in council thou hast rudely lost.
Which by thy younger brother is supplied,
And art almost an alien to the hearts
Of all the court and princes of my blood:
The hope and expectation of thy time
Is ruin'd, and the soul of every man
Prophetically doth forethink thy fall.
Had I so lavish of my presence been,
So common-hackney'd in the eyes of men,
So stale and cheap to vulgar company,
Opinion, that did help me to the crown,
Had still kept loyal to possession
And left me in reputeless banishment,
A fellow of no mark nor likelihood.
By being seldom seen, I could not stir
But like a comet I was wonder'd at
That men would tell their children 'This is he
Others would say 'Where, which is Bolingbroke?'
And then I stole all courtesy from heaven,
And dress'd myself in such humility
That I did pluck allegiance from men's hearts,
Loud shouts and salutations from their mouths,
Even in the presence of the crowned king.
Thus did I keep my person fresh and new
My presence, like a robe pontifical,
Ne'er seen but wonder'd at: and so my state,
Seldom but sumptuous, showed like a feast
And won by rareness such solemnity.
The skipping king, he ambled up and down
With shallow jesters and rash bavin wits,
Soon kindled and soon burnt
Mingled his royalty with capering fools,
Had his great name profaned with their scorns
And gave his countenance, against his name,
To laugh at gibing boys and stand the push
Of every beardless vain comparative,
Grew a companion to the common streets,
Enfeoff'd himself to popularity
That, being daily swallow'd by men's eyes,
They surfeited with honey and began
To loathe the taste of sweetness, whereof a little
More than a little is by much too much.
So when he had occasion to be seen,
He was but as the cuckoo is in June,
Heard, not regarded
As, sick and blunted with community,
Afford no extraordinary gaze,
Such as is bent on sun-like majesty
When it shines seldom in admiring eyes
But rather drowzed and hung their eyelids down,
Slept in his face and render'd such aspect
As cloudy men use to their adversaries,
Being with his presence glutted, gorged and full.
And in that very line, Harry, standest thou
For thou has lost thy princely privilege
With vile participation: not an eye
But is a-weary of thy common sight,
Save mine, which hath desired to see thee more
Which now doth that I would not have it do,
Make blind itself with foolish tenderness.
I shall hereafter, my thrice gracious lord,
Be more myself.
For all the world
As thou art to this hour was Richard then
When I from France set foot at Ravenspurgh,
And even as I was then is Percy now.
Now, by my sceptre and my soul to boot,
He hath more worthy interest to the state
Than thou the shadow of succession
For of no right, nor colour like to right,
He doth fill fields with harness in the realm,
Turns head against the lion's armed jaws,
And, being no more in debt to years than thou,
Leads ancient lords and reverend bishops on
To bloody battles and to bruising arms.
What never-dying honour hath he got
Against renowned Douglas! whose high deeds,
Whose hot incursions and great name in arms
Holds from all soldiers chief majority
And military title capital
Through all the kingdoms that acknowledge Christ:
Thrice hath this Hotspur, Mars in swathling clothes,
This infant warrior, in his enterprises
Discomfited great Douglas, ta'en him once,
Enlarged him and made a friend of him,
To fill the mouth of deep defiance up
And shake the peace and safety of our throne.
And what say you to this? Percy, Northumberland,
The Archbishop's grace of York, Douglas, Mortimer,
Capitulate against us and are up.
But wherefore do I tell these news to thee?
Why, Harry, do I tell thee of my foes,
Which art my near'st and dearest enemy?
Thou that art like enough, through vassal fear,
Base inclination and the start of spleen
To fight against me under Percy's pay,
To dog his heels and curtsy at his frowns,
To show how much thou art degenerate.
Do not think so
And God forgive them that so much have sway'd
Your majesty's good thoughts away from me!
I will redeem all this on Percy's head
And in the closing of some glorious day
Be bold to tell you that I am your son
When I will wear a garment all of blood
And stain my favours in a bloody mask,
Which, wash'd away, shall scour my shame with it:
And that shall be the day, whene'er it lights,
That this same child of honour and renown,
This gallant Hotspur, this all-praised knight,
And your unthought-of Harry chance to meet.
For every honour sitting on his helm,
Would they were multitudes, and on my head
My shames redoubled! for the time will come,
That I shall make this northern youth exchange
His glorious deeds for my indignities.
Percy is but my factor, good my lord,
To engross up glorious deeds on my behalf
And I will call him to so strict account,
That he shall render every glory up,
Yea, even the slightest worship of his time,
Or I will tear the reckoning from his heart.
This, in the name of God, I promise here:
The which if He be pleased I shall perform,
I do beseech your majesty may salve
The long-grown wounds of my intemperance:
If not, the end of life cancels all bands
And I will die a hundred thousand deaths
Ere break the smallest parcel of this vow.
A hundred thousand rebels die in this:
Thou shalt have charge and sovereign trust herein.
Enter BLUNT
How now, good Blunt? thy looks are full of speed.
So hath the business that I come to speak of.
Lord Mortimer of Scotland hath sent word
That Douglas and the English rebels met
The eleventh of this month at Shrewsbury
A mighty and a fearful head they are,
If promises be kept on every hand,
As ever offer'd foul play in the state.
The Earl of Westmoreland set forth to-day
With him my son, Lord John of Lancaster
For this advertisement is five days old:
On Wednesday next, Harry, you shall set forward
On Thursday we ourselves will march: our meeting
Is Bridgenorth: and, Harry, you shall march
Through Gloucestershire
Our business valued, some twelve days hence
Our general forces at Bridgenorth shall meet.
Our hands are full of business: let's away
Advantage feeds him fat, while men delay.
Exeunt
Eastcheap. The Boar's-Head Tavern.
Enter FALSTAFF and BARDOLPH
Bardolph, am I not fallen away vilely since this last
action? do I not bate? do I not dwindle? Why my
skin hangs about me like an like an old lady's loose
gown
I'll repent, and that suddenly, while I am in some
liking
shall have no strength to repent. An I have not
forgotten what the inside of a church is made of, I
am a peppercorn, a brewer's horse: the inside of a
church! Company, villanous company, hath been the
spoil of me.
Sir John, you are so fretful, you cannot live long.
Why, there is it: come sing me a bawdy song
me merry. I was as virtuously given as a gentleman
need to be
above seven times a week
in a quarter--of an hour
borrowed, three of four times
good compass: and now I live out of all order, out
of all compass.
Why, you are so fat, Sir John, that you must needs
be out of all compass, out of all reasonable
compass, Sir John.
Do thou amend thy face, and I'll amend my life:
thou art our admiral, thou bearest the lantern in
the poop, but 'tis in the nose of thee
Knight of the Burning Lamp.
Why, Sir John, my face does you no harm.
No, I'll be sworn
a man doth of a Death's-head or a memento mori: I
never see thy face but I think upon hell-fire and
Dives that lived in purple
robes, burning, burning. If thou wert any way
given to virtue, I would swear by thy face
should be 'By this fire, that's God's angel:' but
thou art altogether given over
for the light in thy face, the son of utter
darkness. When thou rannest up Gadshill in the
night to catch my horse, if I did not think thou
hadst been an ignis fatuus or a ball of wildfire,
there's no purchase in money. O, thou art a
perpetual triumph, an everlasting bonfire-light!
Thou hast saved me a thousand marks in links and
torches, walking with thee in the night betwixt
tavern and tavern: but the sack that thou hast
drunk me would have bought me lights as good cheap
at the dearest chandler's in Europe. I have
maintained that salamander of yours with fire any
time this two and thirty years
it!
'Sblood, I would my face were in your belly!
God-a-mercy! so should I be sure to be heart-burned.
Enter Hostess
How now, Dame Partlet the hen! have you inquired
yet who picked my pocket?
Why, Sir John, what do you think, Sir John? do you
think I keep thieves in my house? I have searched,
I have inquired, so has my husband, man by man, boy
by boy, servant by servant: the tithe of a hair
was never lost in my house before.
Ye lie, hostess: Bardolph was shaved and lost many
a hair
to, you are a woman, go.
Who, I? no
called so in mine own house before.
Go to, I know you well enough.
No, Sir John
you, Sir John: you owe me money, Sir John
you pick a quarrel to beguile me of it: I bought
you a dozen of shirts to your back.
Dowlas, filthy dowlas: I have given them away to
bakers' wives, and they have made bolters of them.
Now, as I am a true woman, holland of eight
shillings an ell. You owe money here besides, Sir
John, for your diet and by-drinkings, and money lent
you, four and twenty pound.
He had his part of it
He? alas, he is poor
How! poor? look upon his face
let them coin his nose, let them coin his cheeks:
Ill not pay a denier. What, will you make a younker
of me? shall I not take mine case in mine inn but I
shall have my pocket picked? I have lost a
seal-ring of my grandfather's worth forty mark.
O Jesu, I have heard the prince tell him, I know not
how oft, that ring was copper!
How! the prince is a Jack, a sneak-cup: 'sblood, an
he were here, I would cudgel him like a dog, if he
would say so.
Enter PRINCE HENRY and PETO, marching, and FALSTAFF meets them playing on his truncheon like a life
How now, lad! is the wind in that door, i' faith?
must we all march?
Yea, two and two, Newgate fashion.
My lord, I pray you, hear me.
What sayest thou, Mistress Quickly? How doth thy
husband? I love him well
Good my lord, hear me.
Prithee, let her alone, and list to me.
What sayest thou, Jack?
The other night I fell asleep here behind the arras
and had my pocket picked: this house is turned
bawdy-house
What didst thou lose, Jack?
Wilt thou believe me, Hal? three or four bonds of
forty pound apiece, and a seal-ring of my
grandfather's.
A trifle, some eight-penny matter.
So I told him, my lord
grace say so: and, my lord, he speaks most vilely
of you, like a foul-mouthed man as he is
he would cudgel you.
What! he did not?
There's neither faith, truth, nor womanhood in me else.
There's no more faith in thee than in a stewed
prune
fox
deputy's wife of the ward to thee. Go, you thing,
go
Say, what thing? what thing?
What thing! why, a thing to thank God on.
I am no thing to thank God on, I would thou
shouldst know it
setting thy knighthood aside, thou art a knave to
call me so.
Setting thy womanhood aside, thou art a beast to say
otherwise.
Say, what beast, thou knave, thou?
What beast! why, an otter.
An otter, Sir John! Why an otter?
Why, she's neither fish nor flesh
where to have her.
Thou art an unjust man in saying so: thou or any
man knows where to have me, thou knave, thou!
Thou sayest true, hostess
So he doth you, my lord
ought him a thousand pound.
Sirrah, do I owe you a thousand pound?
A thousand pound, Ha! a million: thy love is worth
a million: thou owest me thy love.
Nay, my lord, he called you Jack, and said he would
cudgel you.
Did I, Bardolph?
Indeed, Sir John, you said so.
Yea, if he said my ring was copper.
I say 'tis copper: darest thou be as good as thy word now?
Why, Hal, thou knowest, as thou art but man, I dare:
but as thou art prince, I fear thee as I fear the
roaring of a lion's whelp.
And why not as the lion?
The king is to be feared as the lion: dost thou
think I'll fear thee as I fear thy father? nay, an
I do, I pray God my girdle break.
O, if it should, how would thy guts fall about thy
knees! But, sirrah, there's no room for faith,
truth, nor honesty in this bosom of thine
filled up with guts and midriff. Charge an honest
woman with picking thy pocket! why, thou whoreson,
impudent, embossed rascal, if there were anything in
thy pocket but tavern-reckonings, memorandums of
bawdy-houses, and one poor penny-worth of
sugar-candy to make thee long-winded, if thy pocket
were enriched with any other injuries but these, I
am a villain: and yet you will stand to if
not pocket up wrong: art thou not ashamed?
Dost thou hear, Hal? thou knowest in the state of
innocency Adam fell
Falstaff do in the days of villany? Thou seest I
have more flesh than another man, and therefore more
frailty. You confess then, you picked my pocket?
It appears so by the story.
Hostess, I forgive thee: go, make ready breakfast
love thy husband, look to thy servants, cherish thy
guests: thou shalt find me tractable to any honest
reason: thou seest I am pacified still. Nay,
prithee, be gone.
Exit Hostess
Now Hal, to the news at court: for the robbery,
lad, how is that answered?
O, my sweet beef, I must still be good angel to
thee: the money is paid back again.
O, I do not like that paying back
I am good friends with my father and may do any thing.
Rob me the exchequer the first thing thou doest, and
do it with unwashed hands too.
Do, my lord.
I have procured thee, Jack, a charge of foot.
I would it had been of horse. Where shall I find
one that can steal well? O for a fine thief, of the
age of two and twenty or thereabouts! I am
heinously unprovided. Well, God be thanked for
these rebels, they offend none but the virtuous: I
laud them, I praise them.
Bardolph!
My lord?
Go bear this letter to Lord John of Lancaster, to my
brother John
Exit Bardolph
Go, Peto, to horse, to horse
thirty miles to ride yet ere dinner time.
Exit Peto
Jack, meet me to-morrow in the temple hall at two
o'clock in the afternoon.
There shalt thou know thy charge
Money and order for their furniture.
The land is burning
And either we or they must lower lie.
Exit PRINCE HENRY
Rare words! brave world! Hostess, my breakfast, come!
O, I could wish this tavern were my drum!
Exit
ACT IV
SCENE I. The rebel camp near Shrewsbury.
Enter HOTSPUR, WORCESTER, and DOUGLAS
Well said, my noble Scot: if speaking truth
In this fine age were not thought flattery,
Such attribution should the Douglas have,
As not a soldier of this season's stamp
Should go so general current through the world.
By God, I cannot flatter
The tongues of soothers
In my heart's love hath no man than yourself:
Nay, task me to my word
Thou art the king of honour:
No man so potent breathes upon the ground
But I will beard him.
Do so, and 'tis well.
Enter a Messenger with letters
What letters hast thou there?--I can but thank you.
These letters come from your father.
Letters from him! why comes he not himself?
He cannot come, my lord
'Zounds! how has he the leisure to be sick
In such a rustling time? Who leads his power?
Under whose government come they along?
His letters bear his mind, not I, my lord.
I prithee, tell me, doth he keep his bed?
He did, my lord, four days ere I set forth
And at the time of my departure thence
He was much fear'd by his physicians.
I would the state of time had first been whole
Ere he by sickness had been visited:
His health was never better worth than now.
Sick now! droop now! this sickness doth infect
The very life-blood of our enterprise
'Tis catching hither, even to our camp.
He writes me here, that inward sickness--
And that his friends by deputation could not
So soon be drawn, nor did he think it meet
To lay so dangerous and dear a trust
On any soul removed but on his own.
Yet doth he give us bold advertisement,
That with our small conjunction we should on,
To see how fortune is disposed to us
For, as he writes, there is no quailing now.
Because the king is certainly possess'd
Of all our purposes. What say you to it?
Your father's sickness is a maim to us.
A perilous gash, a very limb lopp'd off:
And yet, in faith, it is not
Seems more than we shall find it: were it good
To set the exact wealth of all our states
All at one cast? to set so rich a main
On the nice hazard of one doubtful hour?
It were not good
The very bottom and the soul of hope,
The very list, the very utmost bound
Of all our fortunes.
'Faith, and so we should
Where now remains a sweet reversion:
We may boldly spend upon the hope of what
Is to come in:
A comfort of retirement lives in this.
A rendezvous, a home to fly unto.
If that the devil and mischance look big
Upon the maidenhead of our affairs.
But yet I would your father had been here.
The quality and hair of our attempt
Brooks no division: it will be thought
By some, that know not why he is away,
That wisdom, loyalty and mere dislike
Of our proceedings kept the earl from hence:
And think how such an apprehension
May turn the tide of fearful faction
And breed a kind of question in our cause
For well you know we of the offering side
Must keep aloof from strict arbitrement,
And stop all sight-holes, every loop from whence
The eye of reason may pry in upon us:
This absence of your father's draws a curtain,
That shows the ignorant a kind of fear
Before not dreamt of.
You strain too far.
I rather of his absence make this use:
It lends a lustre and more great opinion,
A larger dare to our great enterprise,
Than if the earl were here
If we without his help can make a head
To push against a kingdom, with his help
We shall o'erturn it topsy-turvy down.
Yet all goes well, yet all our joints are whole.
As heart can think: there is not such a word
Spoke of in Scotland as this term of fear.
Enter SIR RICHARD VERNON
My cousin Vernon, welcome, by my soul.
Pray God my news be worth a welcome, lord.
The Earl of Westmoreland, seven thousand strong,
Is marching hitherwards
No harm: what more?
And further, I have learn'd,
The king himself in person is set forth,
Or hitherwards intended speedily,
With strong and mighty preparation.
He shall be welcome too. Where is his son,
The nimble-footed madcap Prince of Wales,
And his comrades, that daff'd the world aside,
And bid it pass?
All furnish'd, all in arms
All plumed like estridges that with the wind
Baited like eagles having lately bathed
Glittering in golden coats, like images
As full of spirit as the month of May,
And gorgeous as the sun at midsummer
Wanton as youthful goats, wild as young bulls.
I saw young Harry, with his beaver on,
His cuisses on his thighs, gallantly arm'd
Rise from the ground like feather'd Mercury,
And vaulted with such ease into his seat,
As if an angel dropp'd down from the clouds,
To turn and wind a fiery Pegasus
And witch the world with noble horsemanship.
No more, no more: worse than the sun in March,
This praise doth nourish agues. Let them come:
They come like sacrifices in their trim,
And to the fire-eyed maid of smoky war
All hot and bleeding will we offer them:
The mailed Mars shall on his altar sit
Up to the ears in blood. I am on fire
To hear this rich reprisal is so nigh
And yet not ours. Come, let me taste my horse,
Who is to bear me like a thunderbolt
Against the bosom of the Prince of Wales:
Harry to Harry shall, hot horse to horse,
Meet and ne'er part till one drop down a corse.
O that Glendower were come!
There is more news:
I learn'd in Worcester, as I rode along,
He cannot draw his power this fourteen days.
That's the worst tidings that I hear of yet.
Ay, by my faith, that bears a frosty sound.
What may the king's whole battle reach unto?
To thirty thousand.
Forty let it be:
My father and Glendower being both away,
The powers of us may serve so great a day
Come, let us take a muster speedily:
Doomsday is near
Talk not of dying: I am out of fear
Of death or death's hand for this one-half year.
Exeunt
SCENE II. A public road near Coventry.
Enter FALSTAFF and BARDOLPH
Bardolph, get thee before to Coventry
bottle of sack: our soldiers shall march through
we'll to Sutton Co'fil' tonight.
Will you give me money, captain?
Lay out, lay out.
This bottle makes an angel.
An if it do, take it for thy labour
twenty, take them all
my lieutenant Peto meet me at town's end.
I will, captain: farewell.
Exit
If I be not ashamed of my soldiers, I am a soused
gurnet. I have misused the king's press damnably.
I have got, in exchange of a hundred and fifty
soldiers, three hundred and odd pounds. I press me
none but good house-holders, yeoman's sons
me out contracted bachelors, such as had been asked
twice on the banns
as had as lieve hear the devil as a drum
fear the report of a caliver worse than a struck
fowl or a hurt wild-duck. I pressed me none but such
toasts-and-butter, with hearts in their bellies no
bigger than pins' heads, and they have bought out
their services
ancients, corporals, lieutenants, gentlemen of
companies, slaves as ragged as Lazarus in the
painted cloth, where the glutton's dogs licked his
sores
discarded unjust serving-men, younger sons to
younger brothers, revolted tapsters and ostlers
trade-fallen, the cankers of a calm world and a
long peace, ten times more dishonourable ragged than
an old faced ancient: and such have I, to fill up
the rooms of them that have bought out their
services, that you would think that I had a hundred
and fifty tattered prodigals lately come from
swine-keeping, from eating draff and husks. A mad
fellow met me on the way and told me I had unloaded
all the gibbets and pressed the dead bodies. No eye
hath seen such scarecrows. I'll not march through
Coventry with them, that's flat: nay, and the
villains march wide betwixt the legs, as if they had
gyves on
prison. There's but a shirt and a half in all my
company
together and thrown over the shoulders like an
herald's coat without sleeves
the truth, stolen from my host at Saint Alban's, or
the red-nose innkeeper of Daventry. But that's all
one
Enter the PRINCE and WESTMORELAND
How now, blown Jack! how now, quilt!
What, Hal! how now, mad wag! what a devil dost thou
in Warwickshire? My good Lord of Westmoreland, I
cry you mercy: I thought your honour had already been
at Shrewsbury.
Faith, Sir John,'tis more than time that I were
there, and you too
The king, I can tell you, looks for us all: we must
away all night.
Tut, never fear me: I am as vigilant as a cat to
steal cream.
I think, to steal cream indeed, for thy theft hath
already made thee butter. But tell me, Jack, whose
fellows are these that come after?
Mine, Hal, mine.
I did never see such pitiful rascals.
Tut, tut
for powder
tush, man, mortal men, mortal men.
Ay, but, Sir John, methinks they are exceeding poor
and bare, too beggarly.
'Faith, for their poverty, I know not where they had
that
learned that of me.
No I'll be sworn
the ribs bare. But, sirrah, make haste: Percy is
already in the field.
What, is the king encamped?
He is, Sir John: I fear we shall stay too long.
Well,
To the latter end of a fray and the beginning of a feast
Fits a dull fighter and a keen guest.
Exeunt
SCENE III. The rebel camp near Shrewsbury.
Enter HOTSPUR, WORCESTER, DOUGLAS, and VERNON
We'll fight with him to-night.
It may not be.
You give him then the advantage.
Not a whit.
Why say you so? looks he not for supply?
So do we.
His is certain, ours is doubtful.
Good cousin, be advised
Do not, my lord.
You do not counsel well:
You speak it out of fear and cold heart.
Do me no slander, Douglas: by my life,
And I dare well maintain it with my life,
If well-respected honour bid me on,
I hold as little counsel with weak fear
As you, my lord, or any Scot that this day lives:
Let it be seen to-morrow in the battle
Which of us fears.
Yea, or to-night.
Content.
To-night, say I.
Come, come it nay not be. I wonder much,
Being men of such great leading as you are,
That you foresee not what impediments
Drag back our expedition: certain horse
Of my cousin Vernon's are not yet come up:
Your uncle Worcester's horse came but today
And now their pride and mettle is asleep,
Their courage with hard labour tame and dull,
That not a horse is half the half of himself.
So are the horses of the enemy
In general, journey-bated and brought low:
The better part of ours are full of rest.
The number of the king exceedeth ours:
For God's sake. cousin, stay till all come in.
The trumpet sounds a parley
Enter SIR WALTER BLUNT
I come with gracious offers from the king,
if you vouchsafe me hearing and respect.
Welcome, Sir Walter Blunt
You were of our determination!
Some of us love you well
Envy your great deservings and good name,
Because you are not of our quality,
But stand against us like an enemy.
And God defend but still I should stand so,
So long as out of limit and true rule
You stand against anointed majesty.
But to my charge. The king hath sent to know
The nature of your griefs, and whereupon
You conjure from the breast of civil peace
Such bold hostility, teaching his duteous land
Audacious cruelty. If that the king
Have any way your good deserts forgot,
Which he confesseth to be manifold,
He bids you name your griefs
You shall have your desires with interest
And pardon absolute for yourself and these
Herein misled by your suggestion.
The king is kind
Knows at what time to promise, when to pay.
My father and my uncle and myself
Did give him that same royalty he wears
And when he was not six and twenty strong,
Sick in the world's regard, wretched and low,
A poor unminded outlaw sneaking home,
My father gave him welcome to the shore
And when he heard him swear and vow to God
He came but to be Duke of Lancaster,
To sue his livery and beg his peace,
With tears of innocency and terms of zeal,
My father, in kind heart and pity moved,
Swore him assistance and perform'd it too.
Now when the lords and barons of the realm
Perceived Northumberland did lean to him,
The more and less came in with cap and knee
Met him in boroughs, cities, villages,
Attended him on bridges, stood in lanes,
Laid gifts before him, proffer'd him their oaths,
Gave him their heirs, as pages follow'd him
Even at the heels in golden multitudes.
He presently, as greatness knows itself,
Steps me a little higher than his vow
Made to my father, while his blood was poor,
Upon the naked shore at Ravenspurgh
And now, forsooth, takes on him to reform
Some certain edicts and some strait decrees
That lie too heavy on the commonwealth,
Cries out upon abuses, seems to weep
Over his country's wrongs
This seeming brow of justice, did he win
The hearts of all that he did angle for
Proceeded further
Of all the favourites that the absent king
In deputation left behind him here,
When he was personal in the Irish war.
Tut, I came not to hear this.
Then to the point.
In short time after, he deposed the king
Soon after that, deprived him of his life
And in the neck of that, task'd the whole state:
To make that worse, suffer'd his kinsman March,
Who is, if every owner were well placed,
Indeed his king, to be engaged in Wales,
There without ransom to lie forfeited
Disgraced me in my happy victories,
Sought to entrap me by intelligence
Rated mine uncle from the council-board
In rage dismiss'd my father from the court
Broke oath on oath, committed wrong on wrong,
And in conclusion drove us to seek out
This head of safety
Into his title, the which we find
Too indirect for long continuance.
Shall I return this answer to the king?
Not so, Sir Walter: we'll withdraw awhile.
Go to the king
Some surety for a safe return again,
And in the morning early shall my uncle
Bring him our purposes: and so farewell.
I would you would accept of grace and love.
And may be so we shall.
Pray God you do.
Exeunt
SCENE IV. York. The ARCHBISHOP'S palace.
Enter the ARCHBISHOP OF YORK and SIR MICHAEL
Hie, good Sir Michael
With winged haste to the lord marshal
This to my cousin Scroop, and all the rest
To whom they are directed. If you knew
How much they do to import, you would make haste.
My good lord,
I guess their tenor.
Like enough you do.
To-morrow, good Sir Michael, is a day
Wherein the fortune of ten thousand men
Must bide the touch
As I am truly given to understand,
The king with mighty and quick-raised power
Meets with Lord Harry: and, I fear, Sir Michael,
What with the sickness of Northumberland,
Whose power was in the first proportion,
And what with Owen Glendower's absence thence,
Who with them was a rated sinew too
And comes not in, o'er-ruled by prophecies,
I fear the power of Percy is too weak
To wage an instant trial with the king.
Why, my good lord, you need not fear
There is Douglas and Lord Mortimer.
No, Mortimer is not there.
But there is Mordake, Vernon, Lord Harry Percy,
And there is my Lord of Worcester and a head
Of gallant warriors, noble gentlemen.
And so there is: but yet the king hath drawn
The special head of all the land together:
The Prince of Wales, Lord John of Lancaster,
The noble Westmoreland and warlike Blunt
And moe corrivals and dear men
Of estimation and command in arms.
Doubt not, my lord, they shall be well opposed.
I hope no less, yet needful 'tis to fear
And, to prevent the worst, Sir Michael, speed:
For if Lord Percy thrive not, ere the king
Dismiss his power, he means to visit us,
For he hath heard of our confederacy,
And 'tis but wisdom to make strong against him:
Therefore make haste. I must go write again
To other friends
Exeunt
ACT V
SCENE I. KING HENRY IV's camp near Shrewsbury.
Enter KING HENRY, PRINCE HENRY, Lord John of  LANCASTER, EARL OF WESTMORELAND, SIR WALTER BLUNT, and FALSTAFF
How bloodily the sun begins to peer
Above yon busky hill! the day looks pale
At his distemperature.
The southern wind
Doth play the trumpet to his purposes,
And by his hollow whistling in the leaves
Foretells a tempest and a blustering day.
Then with the losers let it sympathize,
For nothing can seem foul to those that win.
The trumpet sounds
Enter WORCESTER and VERNON
How now, my Lord of Worcester! 'tis not well
That you and I should meet upon such terms
As now we meet. You have deceived our trust,
And made us doff our easy robes of peace,
To crush our old limbs in ungentle steel:
This is not well, my lord, this is not well.
What say you to it? will you again unknit
This curlish knot of all-abhorred war?
And move in that obedient orb again
Where you did give a fair and natural light,
And be no more an exhaled meteor,
A prodigy of fear and a portent
Of broached mischief to the unborn times?
Hear me, my liege:
For mine own part, I could be well content
To entertain the lag-end of my life
With quiet hours
I have not sought the day of this dislike.
You have not sought it! how comes it, then?
Rebellion lay in his way, and he found it.
Peace, chewet, peace!
It pleased your majesty to turn your looks
Of favour from myself and all our house
And yet I must remember you, my lord,
We were the first and dearest of your friends.
For you my staff of office did I break
In Richard's time
to meet you on the way, and kiss your hand,
When yet you were in place and in account
Nothing so strong and fortunate as I.
It was myself, my brother and his son,
That brought you home and boldly did outdare
The dangers of the time. You swore to us,
And you did swear that oath at Doncaster,
That you did nothing purpose 'gainst the state
Nor claim no further than your new-fall'n right,
The seat of Gaunt, dukedom of Lancaster:
To this we swore our aid. But in short space
It rain'd down fortune showering on your head
And such a flood of greatness fell on you,
What with our help, what with the absent king,
What with the injuries of a wanton time,
The seeming sufferances that you had borne,
And the contrarious winds that held the king
So long in his unlucky Irish wars
That all in England did repute him dead:
And from this swarm of fair advantages
You took occasion to be quickly woo'd
To gripe the general sway into your hand
Forget your oath to us at Doncaster
And being fed by us you used us so
As that ungentle hull, the cuckoo's bird,
Useth the sparrow
Grew by our feeding to so great a bulk
That even our love durst not come near your sight
For fear of swallowing
We were enforced, for safety sake, to fly
Out of sight and raise this present head
Whereby we stand opposed by such means
As you yourself have forged against yourself
By unkind usage, dangerous countenance,
And violation of all faith and troth
Sworn to us in your younger enterprise.
These things indeed you have articulate,
Proclaim'd at market-crosses, read in churches,
To face the garment of rebellion
With some fine colour that may please the eye
Of fickle changelings and poor discontents,
Which gape and rub the elbow at the news
Of hurlyburly innovation:
And never yet did insurrection want
Such water-colours to impaint his cause
Nor moody beggars, starving for a time
Of pellmell havoc and confusion.
In both your armies there is many a soul
Shall pay full dearly for this encounter,
If once they join in trial. Tell your nephew,
The Prince of Wales doth join with all the world
In praise of Henry Percy: by my hopes,
This present enterprise set off his head,
I do not think a braver gentleman,
More active-valiant or more valiant-young,
More daring or more bold, is now alive
To grace this latter age with noble deeds.
For my part, I may speak it to my shame,
I have a truant been to chivalry
And so I hear he doth account me too
Yet this before my father's majesty--
I am content that he shall take the odds
Of his great name and estimation,
And will, to save the blood on either side,
Try fortune with him in a single fight.
And, Prince of Wales, so dare we venture thee,
Albeit considerations infinite
Do make against it. No, good Worcester, no,
We love our people well
That are misled upon your cousin's part
And, will they take the offer of our grace,
Both he and they and you, every man
Shall be my friend again and I'll be his:
So tell your cousin, and bring me word
What he will do: but if he will not yield,
Rebuke and dread correction wait on us
And they shall do their office. So, be gone
We will not now be troubled with reply:
We offer fair
Exeunt WORCESTER and VERNON
It will not be accepted, on my life:
The Douglas and the Hotspur both together
Are confident against the world in arms.
Hence, therefore, every leader to his charge
For, on their answer, will we set on them:
And God befriend us, as our cause is just!
Exeunt all but PRINCE HENRY and FALSTAFF
Hal, if thou see me down in the battle and bestride
me, so
Nothing but a colossus can do thee that friendship.
Say thy prayers, and farewell.
I  would 'twere bed-time, Hal, and all well.
Why, thou owest God a death.
Exit PRINCE HENRY
'Tis not due yet
his day. What need I be so forward with him that
calls not on me? Well, 'tis no matter
me on. Yea, but how if honour prick me off when I
come on? how then? Can honour set to a leg? no: or
an arm? no: or take away the grief of a wound? no.
Honour hath no skill in surgery, then? no. What is
honour? a word. What is in that word honour? what
is that honour? air. A trim reckoning! Who hath it?
he that died o' Wednesday. Doth he feel it? no.
Doth he hear it? no. 'Tis insensible, then. Yea,
to the dead. But will it not live with the living?
no. Why? detraction will not suffer it. Therefore
I'll none of it. Honour is a mere scutcheon: and so
ends my catechism.
Exit
SCENE II. The rebel camp.
Enter WORCESTER and VERNON
O, no, my nephew must not know, Sir Richard,
The liberal and kind offer of the king.
'Twere best he did.
Then are we all undone.
It is not possible, it cannot be,
The king should keep his word in loving us
He will suspect us still and find a time
To punish this offence in other faults:
Suspicion all our lives shall be stuck full of eyes
For treason is but trusted like the fox,
Who, ne'er so tame, so cherish'd and lock'd up,
Will have a wild trick of his ancestors.
Look how we can, or sad or merrily,
Interpretation will misquote our looks,
And we shall feed like oxen at a stall,
The better cherish'd, still the nearer death.
My nephew's trespass may be well forgot
it hath the excuse of youth and heat of blood,
And an adopted name of privilege,
A hair-brain'd Hotspur, govern'd by a spleen:
All his offences live upon my head
And on his father's
And, his corruption being ta'en from us,
We, as the spring of all, shall pay for all.
Therefore, good cousin, let not Harry know,
In any case, the offer of the king.
Deliver what you will
Here comes your cousin.
Enter HOTSPUR and DOUGLAS
My uncle is return'd:
Deliver up my Lord of Westmoreland.
Uncle, what news?
The king will bid you battle presently.
Defy him by the Lord of Westmoreland.
Lord Douglas, go you and tell him so.
Marry, and shall, and very willingly.
Exit
There is no seeming mercy in the king.
Did you beg any? God forbid!
I told him gently of our grievances,
Of his oath-breaking
By now forswearing that he is forsworn:
He calls us rebels, traitors
With haughty arms this hateful name in us.
Re-enter the EARL OF DOUGLAS
Arm, gentlemen
A brave defiance in King Henry's teeth,
And Westmoreland, that was engaged, did bear it
Which cannot choose but bring him quickly on.
The Prince of Wales stepp'd forth before the king,
And, nephew, challenged you to single fight.
O, would the quarrel lay upon our heads,
And that no man might draw short breath today
But I and Harry Monmouth! Tell me, tell me,
How show'd his tasking? seem'd it in contempt?
No, by my soul
Did hear a challenge urged more modestly,
Unless a brother should a brother dare
To gentle exercise and proof of arms.
He gave you all the duties of a man
Trimm'd up your praises with a princely tongue,
Spoke to your deservings like a chronicle,
Making you ever better than his praise
By still dispraising praise valued in you
And, which became him like a prince indeed,
He made a blushing cital of himself
And chid his truant youth with such a grace
As if he master'd there a double spirit.
Of teaching and of learning instantly.
There did he pause: but let me tell the world,
If he outlive the envy of this day,
England did never owe so sweet a hope,
So much misconstrued in his wantonness.
Cousin, I think thou art enamoured
On his follies: never did I hear
Of any prince so wild a libertine.
But be he as he will, yet once ere night
I will embrace him with a soldier's arm,
That he shall shrink under my courtesy.
Arm, arm with speed: and, fellows, soldiers, friends,
Better consider what you have to do
Than I, that have not well the gift of tongue,
Can lift your blood up with persuasion.
Enter a Messenger
My lord, here are letters for you.
I cannot read them now.
O gentlemen, the time of life is short!
To spend that shortness basely were too long,
If life did ride upon a dial's point,
Still ending at the arrival of an hour.
An if we live, we live to tread on kings
If die, brave death, when princes die with us!
Now, for our consciences, the arms are fair,
When the intent of bearing them is just.
Enter another Messenger
My lord, prepare
I thank him, that he cuts me from my tale,
For I profess not talking
Let each man do his best: and here draw I
A sword, whose temper I intend to stain
With the best blood that I can meet withal
In the adventure of this perilous day.
Now, Esperance! Percy! and set on.
Sound all the lofty instruments of war,
And by that music let us all embrace
For, heaven to earth, some of us never shall
A second time do such a courtesy.
The trumpets sound. They embrace, and exeunt
SCENE III. Plain between the camps.
KING HENRY enters with his power. Alarum to the battle. Then enter DOUGLAS and SIR WALTER BLUNT
What is thy name, that in the battle thus
Thou crossest me? what honour dost thou seek
Upon my head?
Know then, my name is Douglas
And I do haunt thee in the battle thus
Because some tell me that thou art a king.
They tell thee true.
The Lord of Stafford dear to-day hath bought
Thy likeness, for instead of thee, King Harry,
This sword hath ended him: so shall it thee,
Unless thou yield thee as my prisoner.
I was not born a yielder, thou proud Scot
And thou shalt find a king that will revenge
Lord Stafford's death.
They fight. DOUGLAS kills SIR WALTER BLUNT. Enter HOTSPUR
O Douglas, hadst thou fought at Holmedon thus,
never had triumph'd upon a Scot.
All's done, all's won
Where?
Here.
This, Douglas? no: I know this face full well:
A gallant knight he was, his name was Blunt
Semblably furnish'd like the king himself.
A fool go with thy soul, whither it goes!
A borrow'd title hast thou bought too dear:
Why didst thou tell me that thou wert a king?
The king hath many marching in his coats.
Now, by my sword, I will kill all his coats
I'll murder all his wardrobe, piece by piece,
Until I meet the king.
Up, and away!
Our soldiers stand full fairly for the day.
Exeunt
Alarum. Enter FALSTAFF, solus
Though I could 'scape shot-free at London, I fear
the shot here
Soft! who are you? Sir Walter Blunt: there's honour
for you! here's no vanity! I am as hot as moulten
lead, and as heavy too: God keep lead out of me! I
need no more weight than mine own bowels. I have
led my ragamuffins where they are peppered: there's
not three of my hundred and fifty left alive
they are for the town's end, to beg during life.
But who comes here?
Enter PRINCE HENRY
What, stand'st thou idle here? lend me thy sword:
Many a nobleman lies stark and stiff
Under the hoofs of vaunting enemies,
Whose deaths are yet unrevenged: I prithee,
lend me thy sword.
O Hal, I prithee, give me leave to breathe awhile.
Turk Gregory never did such deeds in arms as I have
done this day. I have paid Percy, I have made him sure.
He is, indeed
lend me thy sword.
Nay, before God, Hal, if Percy be alive, thou get'st
not my sword
Give it to me: what, is it in the case?
Ay, Hal
PRINCE HENRY draws it out, and finds it to be a bottle of sack
What, is it a time to jest and dally now?
He throws the bottle at him. Exit
Well, if Percy be alive, I'll pierce him. If he do
come in my way, so: if he do not, if I come in his
willingly, let him make a carbonado of me. I like
not such grinning honour as Sir Walter hath: give me
life: which if I can save, so
unlooked for, and there's an end.
Exit FALSTAFF
SCENE IV. Another part of the field.
Alarum. Excursions. Enter PRINCE HENRY, LORD JOHN OF LANCASTER, and EARL OF WESTMORELAND
I prithee,
Harry, withdraw thyself
Lord John of Lancaster, go you with him.
Not I, my lord, unless I did bleed too.
I beseech your majesty, make up,
Lest your retirement do amaze your friends.
I will do so.
My Lord of Westmoreland, lead him to his tent.
Come, my lord, I'll lead you to your tent.
Lead me, my lord? I do not need your help:
And God forbid a shallow scratch should drive
The Prince of Wales from such a field as this,
Where stain'd nobility lies trodden on,
and rebels' arms triumph in massacres!
We breathe too long: come, cousin Westmoreland,
Our duty this way lies
Exeunt LANCASTER and WESTMORELAND
By God, thou hast deceived me, Lancaster
I did not think thee lord of such a spirit:
Before, I loved thee as a brother, John
But now, I do respect thee as my soul.
I saw him hold Lord Percy at the point
With lustier maintenance than I did look for
Of such an ungrown warrior.
O, this boy
Lends mettle to us all!
Exit
Enter DOUGLAS
Another king! they grow like Hydra's heads:
I am the Douglas, fatal to all those
That wear those colours on them: what art thou,
That counterfeit'st the person of a king?
The king himself
So many of his shadows thou hast met
And not the very king. I have two boys
Seek Percy and thyself about the field:
But, seeing thou fall'st on me so luckily,
I will assay thee: so, defend thyself.
I fear thou art another counterfeit
And yet, in faith, thou bear'st thee like a king:
But mine I am sure thou art, whoe'er thou be,
And thus I win thee.
They fight. KING HENRY being in danger, PRINCE HENRY enters
Hold up thy head, vile Scot, or thou art like
Never to hold it up again! the spirits
Of valiant Shirley, Stafford, Blunt, are in my arms:
It is the Prince of Wales that threatens thee
Who never promiseth but he means to pay.
They fight: DOUGLAS flies
Cheerly, my lord	how fares your grace?
Sir Nicholas Gawsey hath for succor sent,
And so hath Clifton: I'll to Clifton straight.
Stay, and breathe awhile:
Thou hast redeem'd thy lost opinion,
And show'd thou makest some tender of my life,
In this fair rescue thou hast brought to me.
O God! they did me too much injury
That ever said I hearken'd for your death.
If it were so, I might have let alone
The insulting hand of Douglas over you,
Which would have been as speedy in your end
As all the poisonous potions in the world
And saved the treacherous labour of your son.
Make up to Clifton: I'll to Sir Nicholas Gawsey.
Exit
Enter HOTSPUR
If I mistake not, thou art Harry Monmouth.
Thou speak'st as if I would deny my name.
My name is Harry Percy.
Why, then I see
A very valiant rebel of the name.
I am the Prince of Wales
To share with me in glory any more:
Two stars keep not their motion in one sphere
Nor can one England brook a double reign,
Of Harry Percy and the Prince of Wales.
Nor shall it, Harry
To end the one of us
Thy name in arms were now as great as mine!
I'll make it greater ere I part from thee
And all the budding honours on thy crest
I'll crop, to make a garland for my head.
I can no longer brook thy vanities.
They fight
Enter FALSTAFF
Well said, Hal! to it Hal! Nay, you shall find no
boy's play here, I can tell you.
Re-enter DOUGLAS
O, Harry, thou hast robb'd me of my youth!
I better brook the loss of brittle life
Than those proud titles thou hast won of me
They wound my thoughts worse than sword my flesh:
But thought's the slave of life, and life time's fool
And time, that takes survey of all the world,
Must have a stop. O, I could prophesy,
But that the earthy and cold hand of death
Lies on my tongue: no, Percy, thou art dust
And food for--
Dies
For worms, brave Percy: fare thee well, great heart!
Ill-weaved ambition, how much art thou shrunk!
When that this body did contain a spirit,
A kingdom for it was too small a bound
But now two paces of the vilest earth
Is room enough: this earth that bears thee dead
Bears not alive so stout a gentleman.
If thou wert sensible of courtesy,
I should not make so dear a show of zeal:
But let my favours hide thy mangled face
And, even in thy behalf, I'll thank myself
For doing these fair rites of tenderness.
Adieu, and take thy praise with thee to heaven!
Thy ignominy sleep with thee in the grave,
But not remember'd in thy epitaph!
He spieth FALSTAFF on the ground
What, old acquaintance! could not all this flesh
Keep in a little life? Poor Jack, farewell!
I could have better spared a better man:
O, I should have a heavy miss of thee,
If I were much in love with vanity!
Death hath not struck so fat a deer to-day,
Though many dearer, in this bloody fray.
Embowell'd will I see thee by and by:
Till then in blood by noble Percy lie.
Exit PRINCE HENRY
[Rising up]  Embowelled! if thou embowel me to-day,
I'll give you leave to powder me and eat me too
to-morrow. 'Sblood,'twas time to counterfeit, or
that hot termagant Scot had paid me scot and lot too.
Counterfeit? I lie, I am no counterfeit: to die,
is to be a counterfeit
counterfeit of a man who hath not the life of a man:
but to counterfeit dying, when a man thereby
liveth, is to be no counterfeit, but the true and
perfect image of life indeed. The better part of
valour is discretion
have saved my life.'Zounds, I am afraid of this
gunpowder Percy, though he be dead: how, if he
should counterfeit too and rise? by my faith, I am
afraid he would prove the better counterfeit.
Therefore I'll make him sure
killed him. Why may not he rise as well as I?
Nothing confutes me but eyes, and nobody sees me.
Therefore, sirrah,
Stabbing him
with a new wound in your thigh, come you along with me.
Takes up HOTSPUR on his back
Re-enter PRINCE HENRY and LORD JOHN OF LANCASTER
Come, brother John
Thy maiden sword.
But, soft! whom have we here?
Did you not tell me this fat man was dead?
I did
Breathless and bleeding on the ground. Art
thou alive?
Or is it fantasy that plays upon our eyesight?
I prithee, speak
Without our ears: thou art not what thou seem'st.
No, that's certain
be not Jack Falstaff, then am I a Jack. There is Percy:
Throwing the body down
if your father will do me any honour, so
him kill the next Percy himself. I look to be either
earl or duke, I can assure you.
Why, Percy I killed myself and saw thee dead.
Didst thou? Lord, Lord, how this world is given to
lying! I grant you I was down and out of breath
and so was he: but we rose both at an instant and
fought a long hour by Shrewsbury clock. If I may be
believed, so
valour bear the sin upon their own heads. I'll take
it upon my death, I gave him this wound in the
thigh: if the man were alive and would deny it,
'zounds, I would make him eat a piece of my sword.
This is the strangest tale that ever I heard.
This is the strangest fellow, brother John.
Come, bring your luggage nobly on your back:
For my part, if a lie may do thee grace,
I'll gild it with the happiest terms I have.
A retreat is sounded
The trumpet sounds retreat
Come, brother, let us to the highest of the field,
To see what friends are living, who are dead.
Exeunt PRINCE HENRY and LANCASTER
I'll follow, as they say, for reward. He that
rewards me, God reward him! If I do grow great,
I'll grow less
live cleanly as a nobleman should do.
Exit
SCENE V. Another part of the field.
The trumpets sound. Enter KING HENRY IV, PRINCE  HENRY, LORD JOHN LANCASTER, EARL OF WESTMORELAND, with WORCESTER and VERNON prisoners
Thus ever did rebellion find rebuke.
Ill-spirited Worcester! did not we send grace,
Pardon and terms of love to all of you?
And wouldst thou turn our offers contrary?
Misuse the tenor of thy kinsman's trust?
Three knights upon our party slain to-day,
A noble earl and many a creature else
Had been alive this hour,
If like a Christian thou hadst truly borne
Betwixt our armies true intelligence.
What I have done my safety urged me to
And I embrace this fortune patiently,
Since not to be avoided it falls on me.
Bear Worcester to the death and Vernon too:
Other offenders we will pause upon.
Exeunt WORCESTER and VERNON, guarded
How goes the field?
The noble Scot, Lord Douglas, when he saw
The fortune of the day quite turn'd from him,
The noble Percy slain, and all his men
Upon the foot of fear, fled with the rest
And falling from a hill, he was so bruised
That the pursuers took him. At my tent
The Douglas is
I may dispose of him.
With all my heart.
Then, brother John of Lancaster, to you
This honourable bounty shall belong:
Go to the Douglas, and deliver him
Up to his pleasure, ransomless and free:
His valour shown upon our crests to-day
Hath taught us how to cherish such high deeds
Even in the bosom of our adversaries.
I thank your grace for this high courtesy,
Which I shall give away immediately.
Then this remains, that we divide our power.
You, son John, and my cousin Westmoreland
Towards York shall bend you with your dearest speed,
To meet Northumberland and the prelate Scroop,
Who, as we hear, are busily in arms:
Myself and you, son Harry, will towards Wales,
To fight with Glendower and the Earl of March.
Rebellion in this land shall lose his sway,
Meeting the cheque of such another day:
And since this business so fair is done,
Let us not leave till all our own be won.
Exeunt
ACT I
SCENE I. Westminster Abbey.
Dead March. Enter the Funeral of KING HENRY the  Fifth, attended on by Dukes of BEDFORD, Regent of  France
Hung be the heavens with black, yield day to night!
Comets, importing change of times and states,
Brandish your crystal tresses in the sky,
And with them scourge the bad revolting stars
That have consented unto Henry's death!
King Henry the Fifth, too famous to live long!
England ne'er lost a king of so much worth.
England ne'er had a king until his time.
Virtue he had, deserving to command:
His brandish'd sword did blind men with his beams:
His arms spread wider than a dragon's wings
His sparking eyes, replete with wrathful fire,
More dazzled and drove back his enemies
Than mid-day sun fierce bent against their faces.
What should I say? his deeds exceed all speech:
He ne'er lift up his hand but conquered.
We mourn in black: why mourn we not in blood?
Henry is dead and never shall revive:
Upon a wooden coffin we attend,
And death's dishonourable victory
We with our stately presence glorify,
Like captives bound to a triumphant car.
What! shall we curse the planets of mishap
That plotted thus our glory's overthrow?
Or shall we think the subtle-witted French
Conjurers and sorcerers, that afraid of him
By magic verses have contrived his end?
BISHOP
He was a king bless'd of the King of kings.
Unto the French the dreadful judgement-day
So dreadful will not be as was his sight.
The battles of the Lord of hosts he fought:
The church's prayers made him so prosperous.
The church! where is it? Had not churchmen pray'd,
His thread of life had not so soon decay'd:
None do you like but an effeminate prince,
Whom, like a school-boy, you may over-awe.
BISHOP
Gloucester, whate'er we like, thou art protector
And lookest to command the prince and realm.
Thy wife is proud
More than God or religious churchmen may.
Name not religion, for thou lovest the flesh,
And ne'er throughout the year to church thou go'st
Except it be to pray against thy foes.
Cease, cease these jars and rest your minds in peace:
Let's to the altar: heralds, wait on us:
Instead of gold, we'll offer up our arms:
Since arms avail not now that Henry's dead.
Posterity, await for wretched years,
When at their mothers' moist eyes babes shall suck,
Our isle be made a nourish of salt tears,
And none but women left to wail the dead.
Henry the Fifth, thy ghost I invocate:
Prosper this realm, keep it from civil broils,
Combat with adverse planets in the heavens!
A far more glorious star thy soul will make
Than Julius Caesar or bright--
Enter a Messenger
My honourable lords, health to you all!
Sad tidings bring I to you out of France,
Of loss, of slaughter and discomfiture:
Guienne, Champagne, Rheims, Orleans,
Paris, Guysors, Poictiers, are all quite lost.
What say'st thou, man, before dead Henry's corse?
Speak softly, or the loss of those great towns
Will make him burst his lead and rise from death.
Is Paris lost? is Rouen yielded up?
If Henry were recall'd to life again,
These news would cause him once more yield the ghost.
How were they lost? what treachery was used?
No treachery
Amongst the soldiers this is muttered,
That here you maintain several factions,
And whilst a field should be dispatch'd and fought,
You are disputing of your generals:
One would have lingering wars with little cost
Another would fly swift, but wanteth wings
A third thinks, without expense at all,
By guileful fair words peace may be obtain'd.
Awake, awake, English nobility!
Let not sloth dim your horrors new-begot:
Cropp'd are the flower-de-luces in your arms
Of England's coat one half is cut away.
Were our tears wanting to this funeral,
These tidings would call forth their flowing tides.
Me they concern
Give me my steeled coat. I'll fight for France.
Away with these disgraceful wailing robes!
Wounds will I lend the French instead of eyes,
To weep their intermissive miseries.
Enter to them another Messenger
Lords, view these letters full of bad mischance.
France is revolted from the English quite,
Except some petty towns of no import:
The Dauphin Charles is crowned king of Rheims
The Bastard of Orleans with him is join'd
Reignier, Duke of Anjou, doth take his part
The Duke of Alencon flieth to his side.
The Dauphin crowned king! all fly to him!
O, whither shall we fly from this reproach?
We will not fly, but to our enemies' throats.
Bedford, if thou be slack, I'll fight it out.
Gloucester, why doubt'st thou of my forwardness?
An army have I muster'd in my thoughts,
Wherewith already France is overrun.
Enter another Messenger
My gracious lords, to add to your laments,
Wherewith you now bedew King Henry's hearse,
I must inform you of a dismal fight
Betwixt the stout Lord Talbot and the French.
BISHOP
What! wherein Talbot overcame? is't so?
O, no
The circumstance I'll tell you more at large.
The tenth of August last this dreadful lord,
Retiring from the siege of Orleans,
Having full scarce six thousand in his troop.
By three and twenty thousand of the French
Was round encompassed and set upon.
No leisure had he to enrank his men
He wanted pikes to set before his archers
Instead whereof sharp stakes pluck'd out of hedges
They pitched in the ground confusedly,
To keep the horsemen off from breaking in.
More than three hours the fight continued
Where valiant Talbot above human thought
Enacted wonders with his sword and lance:
Hundreds he sent to hell, and none durst stand him
Here, there, and every where, enraged he flew:
The French exclaim'd, the devil was in arms
All the whole army stood agazed on him:
His soldiers spying his undaunted spirit
A Talbot! a Talbot! cried out amain
And rush'd into the bowels of the battle.
Here had the conquest fully been seal'd up,
If Sir John Fastolfe had not play'd the coward:
He, being in the vaward, placed behind
With purpose to relieve and follow them,
Cowardly fled, not having struck one stroke.
Hence grew the general wreck and massacre
Enclosed were they with their enemies:
A base Walloon, to win the Dauphin's grace,
Thrust Talbot with a spear into the back,
Whom all France with their chief assembled strength
Durst not presume to look once in the face.
Is Talbot slain? then I will slay myself,
For living idly here in pomp and ease,
Whilst such a worthy leader, wanting aid,
Unto his dastard foemen is betray'd.
O no, he lives
And Lord Scales with him and Lord Hungerford:
Most of the rest slaughter'd or took likewise.
His ransom there is none but I shall pay:
I'll hale the Dauphin headlong from his throne:
His crown shall be the ransom of my friend
Four of their lords I'll change for one of ours.
Farewell, my masters
Bonfires in France forthwith I am to make,
To keep our great Saint George's feast withal:
Ten thousand soldiers with me I will take,
Whose bloody deeds shall make all Europe quake.
So you had need
The English army is grown weak and faint:
The Earl of Salisbury craveth supply,
And hardly keeps his men from mutiny,
Since they, so few, watch such a multitude.
Remember, lords, your oaths to Henry sworn,
Either to quell the Dauphin utterly,
Or bring him in obedience to your yoke.
I do remember it
To go about my preparation.
Exit
I'll to the Tower with all the haste I can,
To view the artillery and munition
And then I will proclaim young Henry king.
Exit
To Eltham will I, where the young king is,
Being ordain'd his special governor,
And for his safety there I'll best devise.
Exit
BISHOP
Each hath his place and function to attend:
I am left out
But long I will not be Jack out of office:
The king from Eltham I intend to steal
And sit at chiefest stern of public weal.
Exeunt
SCENE II. France. Before Orleans.
Sound a flourish. Enter CHARLES, ALENCON, and REIGNIER, marching with drum and Soldiers
Mars his true moving, even as in the heavens
So in the earth, to this day is not known:
Late did he shine upon the English side
Now we are victors
What towns of any moment but we have?
At pleasure here we lie near Orleans
Otherwhiles the famish'd English, like pale ghosts,
Faintly besiege us one hour in a month.
They want their porridge and their fat bull-beeves:
Either they must be dieted like mules
And have their provender tied to their mouths
Or piteous they will look, like drowned mice.
Let's raise the siege: why live we idly here?
Talbot is taken, whom we wont to fear:
Remaineth none but mad-brain'd Salisbury
And he may well in fretting spend his gall,
Nor men nor money hath he to make war.
Sound, sound alarum! we will rush on them.
Now for the honour of the forlorn French!
Him I forgive my death that killeth me
When he sees me go back one foot or fly.
Exeunt
Here alarum
Who ever saw the like? what men have I!
Dogs! cowards! dastards! I would ne'er have fled,
But that they left me 'midst my enemies.
Salisbury is a desperate homicide
He fighteth as one weary of his life.
The other lords, like lions wanting food,
Do rush upon us as their hungry prey.
Froissart, a countryman of ours, records,
England all Olivers and Rowlands bred,
During the time Edward the Third did reign.
More truly now may this be verified
For none but Samsons and Goliases
It sendeth forth to skirmish. One to ten!
Lean, raw-boned rascals! who would e'er suppose
They had such courage and audacity?
Let's leave this town
And hunger will enforce them to be more eager:
Of old I know them
The walls they'll tear down than forsake the siege.
I think, by some odd gimmors or device
Their arms are set like clocks, stiff to strike on
Else ne'er could they hold out so as they do.
By my consent, we'll even let them alone.
Be it so.
Enter the BASTARD OF ORLEANS
Where's the Prince Dauphin? I have news for him.
Bastard of Orleans, thrice welcome to us.
Methinks your looks are sad, your cheer appall'd:
Hath the late overthrow wrought this offence?
Be not dismay'd, for succor is at hand:
A holy maid hither with me I bring,
Which by a vision sent to her from heaven
Ordained is to raise this tedious siege
And drive the English forth the bounds of France.
The spirit of deep prophecy she hath,
Exceeding the nine sibyls of old Rome:
What's past and what's to come she can descry.
Speak, shall I call her in? Believe my words,
For they are certain and unfallible.
Go, call her in.
Exit BASTARD OF ORLEANS
But first, to try her skill,
Reignier, stand thou as Dauphin in my place:
Question her proudly
By this means shall we sound what skill she hath.
Re-enter the BASTARD OF ORLEANS, with JOAN LA PUCELLE
Fair maid, is't thou wilt do these wondrous feats?
Reignier, is't thou that thinkest to beguile me?
Where is the Dauphin? Come, come from behind
I know thee well, though never seen before.
Be not amazed, there's nothing hid from me:
In private will I talk with thee apart.
Stand back, you lords, and give us leave awhile.
She takes upon her bravely at first dash.
Dauphin, I am by birth a shepherd's daughter,
My wit untrain'd in any kind of art.
Heaven and our Lady gracious hath it pleased
To shine on my contemptible estate:
Lo, whilst I waited on my tender lambs,
And to sun's parching heat display'd my cheeks,
God's mother deigned to appear to me
And in a vision full of majesty
Will'd me to leave my base vocation
And free my country from calamity:
Her aid she promised and assured success:
In complete glory she reveal'd herself
And, whereas I was black and swart before,
With those clear rays which she infused on me
That beauty am I bless'd with which you see.
Ask me what question thou canst possible,
And I will answer unpremeditated:
My courage try by combat, if thou darest,
And thou shalt find that I exceed my sex.
Resolve on this, thou shalt be fortunate,
If thou receive me for thy warlike mate.
Thou hast astonish'd me with thy high terms:
Only this proof I'll of thy valour make,
In single combat thou shalt buckle with me,
And if thou vanquishest, thy words are true
Otherwise I renounce all confidence.
I am prepared: here is my keen-edged sword,
Deck'd with five flower-de-luces on each side
The which at Touraine, in Saint Katharine's
churchyard,
Out of a great deal of old iron I chose forth.
Then come, o' God's name
And while I live, I'll ne'er fly from a man.
Here they fight, and JOAN LA PUCELLE overcomes
Stay, stay thy hands! thou art an Amazon
And fightest with the sword of Deborah.
Christ's mother helps me, else I were too weak.
Whoe'er helps thee, 'tis thou that must help me:
Impatiently I burn with thy desire
My heart and hands thou hast at once subdued.
Excellent Pucelle, if thy name be so,
Let me thy servant and not sovereign be:
'Tis the French Dauphin sueth to thee thus.
I must not yield to any rites of love,
For my profession's sacred from above:
When I have chased all thy foes from hence,
Then will I think upon a recompense.
Meantime look gracious on thy prostrate thrall.
My lord, methinks, is very long in talk.
Doubtless he shrives this woman to her smock
Else ne'er could he so long protract his speech.
Shall we disturb him, since he keeps no mean?
He may mean more than we poor men do know:
These women are shrewd tempters with their tongues.
My lord, where are you? what devise you on?
Shall we give over Orleans, or no?
Why, no, I say, distrustful recreants!
Fight till the last gasp
What she says I'll confirm: we'll fight it out.
Assign'd am I to be the English scourge.
This night the siege assuredly I'll raise:
Expect Saint Martin's summer, halcyon days,
Since I have entered into these wars.
Glory is like a circle in the water,
Which never ceaseth to enlarge itself
Till by broad spreading it disperse to nought.
With Henry's death the English circle ends
Dispersed are the glories it included.
Now am I like that proud insulting ship
Which Caesar and his fortune bare at once.
Was Mahomet inspired with a dove?
Thou with an eagle art inspired then.
Helen, the mother of great Constantine,
Nor yet Saint Philip's daughters, were like thee.
Bright star of Venus, fall'n down on the earth,
How may I reverently worship thee enough?
Leave off delays, and let us raise the siege.
Woman, do what thou canst to save our honours
Drive them from Orleans and be immortalized.
Presently we'll try: come, let's away about it:
No prophet will I trust, if she prove false.
Exeunt
SCENE III. London. Before the Tower.
Enter GLOUCESTER, with his Serving-men in blue coats
I am come to survey the Tower this day:
Since Henry's death, I fear, there is conveyance.
Where be these warders, that they wait not here?
Open the gates
[Within]  Who's there that knocks so imperiously?
First Serving-Man	It is the noble Duke of Gloucester.
[Within]  Whoe'er he be, you may not be let in.
First Serving-Man	Villains, answer you so the lord protector?
[Within]  The Lord protect him! so we answer him:
We do no otherwise than we are will'd.
Who willed you? or whose will stands but mine?
There's none protector of the realm but I.
Break up the gates, I'll be your warrantize.
Shall I be flouted thus by dunghill grooms?
Gloucester's men rush at the Tower Gates, and WOODVILE the Lieutenant speaks within
What noise is this? what traitors have we here?
Lieutenant, is it you whose voice I hear?
Open the gates
Have patience, noble duke
The Cardinal of Winchester forbids:
From him I have express commandment
That thou nor none of thine shall be let in.
Faint-hearted Woodvile, prizest him 'fore me?
Arrogant Winchester, that haughty prelate,
Whom Henry, our late sovereign, ne'er could brook?
Thou art no friend to God or to the king:
Open the gates, or I'll shut thee out shortly.
Serving-Men	Open the gates unto the lord protector,
Or we'll burst them open, if that you come not quickly.
Enter to the Protector at the Tower Gates BISHOP OF WINCHESTER and his men in tawny coats
BISHOP
How now, ambitious Humphry! what means this?
Peel'd priest, dost thou command me to be shut out?
BISHOP
I do, thou most usurping proditor,
And not protector, of the king or realm.
Stand back, thou manifest conspirator,
Thou that contrivedst to murder our dead lord
Thou that givest whores indulgences to sin:
I'll canvass thee in thy broad cardinal's hat,
If thou proceed in this thy insolence.
BISHOP
Nay, stand thou back, I will not budge a foot:
This be Damascus, be thou cursed Cain,
To slay thy brother Abel, if thou wilt.
I will not slay thee, but I'll drive thee back:
Thy scarlet robes as a child's bearing-cloth
I'll use to carry thee out of this place.
BISHOP
Do what thou darest
What! am I dared and bearded to my face?
Draw, men, for all this privileged place
Blue coats to tawny coats. Priest, beware your beard,
I mean to tug it and to cuff you soundly:
Under my feet I stamp thy cardinal's hat:
In spite of pope or dignities of church,
Here by the cheeks I'll drag thee up and down.
BISHOP
Gloucester, thou wilt answer this before the pope.
Winchester goose, I cry, a rope! a rope!
Now beat them hence
Thee I'll chase hence, thou wolf in sheep's array.
Out, tawny coats! out, scarlet hypocrite!
Here GLOUCESTER's men beat out BISHOP OF  WINCHESTER's men, and enter in the hurly- burly the Mayor of London and his Officers
Fie, lords! that you, being supreme magistrates,
Thus contumeliously should break the peace!
Peace, mayor! thou know'st little of my wrongs:
Here's Beaufort, that regards nor God nor king,
Hath here distrain'd the Tower to his use.
BISHOP
Here's Gloucester, a foe to citizens,
One that still motions war and never peace,
O'ercharging your free purses with large fines,
That seeks to overthrow religion,
Because he is protector of the realm,
And would have armour here out of the Tower,
To crown himself king and suppress the prince.
I will not answer thee with words, but blows.
Here they skirmish again
Naught rests for me in this tumultuous strife
But to make open proclamation:
Come, officer
Cry.
All manner of men assembled here in arms this day
against God's peace and the king's, we charge and
command you, in his highness' name, to repair to
your several dwelling-places
handle, or use any sword, weapon, or dagger,
henceforward, upon pain of death.
Cardinal, I'll be no breaker of the law:
But we shall meet, and break our minds at large.
BISHOP
Gloucester, we will meet
Thy heart-blood I will have for this day's work.
I'll call for clubs, if you will not away.
This cardinal's more haughty than the devil.
Mayor, farewell: thou dost but what thou mayst.
BISHOP
Abominable Gloucester, guard thy head
For I intend to have it ere long.
Exeunt, severally, GLOUCESTER and BISHOP OF WINCHESTER with their Serving-men
See the coast clear'd, and then we will depart.
Good God, these nobles should such stomachs bear!
I myself fight not once in forty year.
Exeunt
SCENE IV. Orleans.
Enter, on the walls, a Master Gunner and his Boy
Master-Gunner	Sirrah, thou know'st how Orleans is besieged,
And how the English have the suburbs won.
Father, I know
Howe'er unfortunate I miss'd my aim.
Master-Gunner	But now thou shalt not. Be thou ruled by me:
Chief master-gunner am I of this town
Something I must do to procure me grace.
The prince's espials have informed me
How the English, in the suburbs close intrench'd,
Wont, through a secret grate of iron bars
In yonder tower, to overpeer the city,
And thence discover how with most advantage
They may vex us with shot, or with assault.
To intercept this inconvenience,
A piece of ordnance 'gainst it I have placed
And even these three days have I watch'd,
If I could see them.
Now do thou watch, for I can stay no longer.
If thou spy'st any, run and bring me word
And thou shalt find me at the governor's.
Exit
Father, I warrant you
I'll never trouble you, if I may spy them.
Exit
Enter, on the turrets, SALISBURY and TALBOT, GLANSDALE, GARGRAVE, and others
Talbot, my life, my joy, again return'd!
How wert thou handled being prisoner?
Or by what means got'st thou to be released?
Discourse, I prithee, on this turret's top.
The Duke of Bedford had a prisoner
Call'd the brave Lord Ponton de Santrailles
For him was I exchanged and ransomed.
But with a baser man of arms by far
Once in contempt they would have barter'd me:
Which I, disdaining, scorn'd
Rather than I would be so vile esteem'd.
In fine, redeem'd I was as I desired.
But, O! the treacherous Fastolfe wounds my heart,
Whom with my bare fists I would execute,
If I now had him brought into my power.
Yet tell'st thou not how thou wert entertain'd.
With scoffs and scorns and contumelious taunts.
In open market-place produced they me,
To be a public spectacle to all:
Here, said they, is the terror of the French,
The scarecrow that affrights our children so.
Then broke I from the officers that led me,
And with my nails digg'd stones out of the ground,
To hurl at the beholders of my shame:
My grisly countenance made others fly
None durst come near for fear of sudden death.
In iron walls they deem'd me not secure
So great fear of my name 'mongst them was spread,
That they supposed I could rend bars of steel,
And spurn in pieces posts of adamant:
Wherefore a guard of chosen shot I had,
That walked about me every minute-while
And if I did but stir out of my bed,
Ready they were to shoot me to the heart.
Enter the Boy with a linstock
I grieve to hear what torments you endured,
But we will be revenged sufficiently
Now it is supper-time in Orleans:
Here, through this grate, I count each one
and view the Frenchmen how they fortify:
Let us look in
Sir Thomas Gargrave, and Sir William Glansdale,
Let me have your express opinions
Where is best place to make our battery next.
I think, at the north gate
And I, here, at the bulwark of the bridge.
For aught I see, this city must be famish'd,
Or with light skirmishes enfeebled.
Here they shoot. SALISBURY and GARGRAVE fall
O Lord, have mercy on us, wretched sinners!
O Lord, have mercy on me, woful man!
What chance is this that suddenly hath cross'd us?
Speak, Salisbury
How farest thou, mirror of all martial men?
One of thy eyes and thy cheek's side struck off!
Accursed tower! accursed fatal hand
That hath contrived this woful tragedy!
In thirteen battles Salisbury o'ercame
Henry the Fifth he first train'd to the wars
Whilst any trump did sound, or drum struck up,
His sword did ne'er leave striking in the field.
Yet livest thou, Salisbury? though thy speech doth fail,
One eye thou hast, to look to heaven for grace:
The sun with one eye vieweth all the world.
Heaven, be thou gracious to none alive,
If Salisbury wants mercy at thy hands!
Bear hence his body
Sir Thomas Gargrave, hast thou any life?
Speak unto Talbot
Salisbury, cheer thy spirit with this comfort
Thou shalt not die whiles--
He beckons with his hand and smiles on me.
As who should say 'When I am dead and gone,
Remember to avenge me on the French.'
Plantagenet, I will
Play on the lute, beholding the towns burn:
Wretched shall France be only in my name.
Here an alarum, and it thunders and lightens
What stir is this? what tumult's in the heavens?
Whence cometh this alarum and the noise?
Enter a Messenger
My lord, my lord, the French have gathered head:
The Dauphin, with one Joan la Pucelle join'd,
A holy prophetess new risen up,
Is come with a great power to raise the siege.
Here SALISBURY lifteth himself up and groans
Hear, hear how dying Salisbury doth groan!
It irks his heart he cannot be revenged.
Frenchmen, I'll be a Salisbury to you:
Pucelle or puzzel, dolphin or dogfish,
Your hearts I'll stamp out with my horse's heels,
And make a quagmire of your mingled brains.
Convey me Salisbury into his tent,
And then we'll try what these dastard Frenchmen dare.
Alarum. Exeunt
SCENE V. The same.
Here an alarum again: and TALBOT pursueth the  DAUPHIN, and driveth him: then enter JOAN LA  PUCELLE, driving Englishmen before her, and exit after them then re-enter TALBOT
Where is my strength, my valour, and my force?
Our English troops retire, I cannot stay them:
A woman clad in armour chaseth them.
Re-enter JOAN LA PUCELLE
Here, here she comes. I'll have a bout with thee
Devil or devil's dam, I'll conjure thee:
Blood will I draw on thee, thou art a witch,
And straightway give thy soul to him thou servest.
Come, come, 'tis only I that must disgrace thee.
Here they fight
Heavens, can you suffer hell so to prevail?
My breast I'll burst with straining of my courage
And from my shoulders crack my arms asunder.
But I will chastise this high-minded strumpet.
They fight again
Talbot, farewell
I must go victual Orleans forthwith.
A short alarum
O'ertake me, if thou canst
Go, go, cheer up thy hungry-starved men
Help Salisbury to make his testament:
This day is ours, as many more shall be.
Exit
My thoughts are whirled like a potter's wheel
I know not where I am, nor what I do
A witch, by fear, not force, like Hannibal,
Drives back our troops and conquers as she lists:
So bees with smoke and doves with noisome stench
Are from their hives and houses driven away.
They call'd us for our fierceness English dogs
Now, like to whelps, we crying run away.
A short alarum
Hark, countrymen! either renew the fight,
Or tear the lions out of England's coat
Renounce your soil, give sheep in lions' stead:
Sheep run not half so treacherous from the wolf,
Or horse or oxen from the leopard,
As you fly from your oft-subdued slaves.
Alarum. Here another skirmish
It will not be: retire into your trenches:
You all consented unto Salisbury's death,
For none would strike a stroke in his revenge.
Pucelle is enter'd into Orleans,
In spite of us or aught that we could do.
O, would I were to die with Salisbury!
The shame hereof will make me hide my head.
Exit TALBOT. Alarum
SCENE VI. The same.
Enter, on the walls, JOAN LA PUCELLE, CHARLES, REIGNIER, ALENCON, and Soldiers
Advance our waving colours on the walls
Rescued is Orleans from the English
Thus Joan la Pucelle hath perform'd her word.
Divinest creature, Astraea's daughter,
How shall I honour thee for this success?
Thy promises are like Adonis' gardens
That one day bloom'd and fruitful were the next.
France, triumph in thy glorious prophetess!
Recover'd is the town of Orleans:
More blessed hap did ne'er befall our state.
Why ring not out the bells aloud throughout the town?
Dauphin, command the citizens make bonfires
And feast and banquet in the open streets,
To celebrate the joy that God hath given us.
All France will be replete with mirth and joy,
When they shall hear how we have play'd the men.
'Tis Joan, not we, by whom the day is won
For which I will divide my crown with her,
And all the priests and friars in my realm
Shall in procession sing her endless praise.
A statelier pyramis to her I'll rear
Than Rhodope's or Memphis' ever was:
In memory of her when she is dead,
Her ashes, in an urn more precious
Than the rich-jewel'd of Darius,
Transported shall be at high festivals
Before the kings and queens of France.
No longer on Saint Denis will we cry,
But Joan la Pucelle shall be France's saint.
Come in, and let us banquet royally,
After this golden day of victory.
Flourish. Exeunt
ACT II
SCENE I. Before Orleans.
Enter a Sergeant of a band with two Sentinels
Sirs, take your places and be vigilant:
If any noise or soldier you perceive
Near to the walls, by some apparent sign
Let us have knowledge at the court of guard.
Sergeant, you shall.
Exit Sergeant
Thus are poor servitors,
When others sleep upon their quiet beds,
Constrain'd to watch in darkness, rain and cold.
Enter TALBOT, BEDFORD, BURGUNDY, and Forces, with scaling-ladders, their drums beating a dead march
Lord Regent, and redoubted Burgundy,
By whose approach the regions of Artois,
Wallon and Picardy are friends to us,
This happy night the Frenchmen are secure,
Having all day caroused and banqueted:
Embrace we then this opportunity
As fitting best to quittance their deceit
Contrived by art and baleful sorcery.
Coward of France! how much he wrongs his fame,
Despairing of his own arm's fortitude,
To join with witches and the help of hell!
Traitors have never other company.
But what's that Pucelle whom they term so pure?
A maid, they say.
A maid! and be so martial!
Pray God she prove not masculine ere long,
If underneath the standard of the French
She carry armour as she hath begun.
Well, let them practise and converse with spirits:
God is our fortress, in whose conquering name
Let us resolve to scale their flinty bulwarks.
Ascend, brave Talbot
Not all together: better far, I guess,
That we do make our entrance several ways
That, if it chance the one of us do fail,
The other yet may rise against their force.
Agreed: I'll to yond corner.
And I to this.
And here will Talbot mount, or make his grave.
Now, Salisbury, for thee, and for the right
Of English Henry, shall this night appear
How much in duty I am bound to both.
Arm! arm! the enemy doth make assault!
Cry: 'St. George,' 'A Talbot.'
The French leap over the walls in their shirts.  Enter, several ways, the BASTARD OF ORLEANS, ALENCON, and REIGNIER, half ready, and half unready
How now, my lords! what, all unready so?
Unready! ay, and glad we 'scaped so well.
'Twas time, I trow, to wake and leave our beds,
Hearing alarums at our chamber-doors.
Of all exploits since first I follow'd arms,
Ne'er heard I of a warlike enterprise
More venturous or desperate than this.
I think this Talbot be a fiend of hell.
If not of hell, the heavens, sure, favour him.
Here cometh Charles: I marvel how he sped.
Tut, holy Joan was his defensive guard.
Enter CHARLES and JOAN LA PUCELLE
Is this thy cunning, thou deceitful dame?
Didst thou at first, to flatter us withal,
Make us partakers of a little gain,
That now our loss might be ten times so much?
Wherefore is Charles impatient with his friend!
At all times will you have my power alike?
Sleeping or waking must I still prevail,
Or will you blame and lay the fault on me?
Improvident soldiers! had your watch been good,
This sudden mischief never could have fall'n.
Duke of Alencon, this was your default,
That, being captain of the watch to-night,
Did look no better to that weighty charge.
Had all your quarters been as safely kept
As that whereof I had the government,
We had not been thus shamefully surprised.
Mine was secure.
And so was mine, my lord.
And, for myself, most part of all this night,
Within her quarter and mine own precinct
I was employ'd in passing to and fro,
About relieving of the sentinels:
Then how or which way should they first break in?
Question, my lords, no further of the case,
How or which way: 'tis sure they found some place
But weakly guarded, where the breach was made.
And now there rests no other shift but this
To gather our soldiers, scatter'd and dispersed,
And lay new platforms to endamage them.
Alarum. Enter an English Soldier, crying 'A  Talbot! a Talbot!' They fly, leaving their clothes behind
I'll be so bold to take what they have left.
The cry of Talbot serves me for a sword
For I have loaden me with many spoils,
Using no other weapon but his name.
Exit
SCENE II. Orleans. Within the town.
Enter TALBOT, BEDFORD, BURGUNDY, a Captain, and others
The day begins to break, and night is fled,
Whose pitchy mantle over-veil'd the earth.
Here sound retreat, and cease our hot pursuit.
Retreat sounded
Bring forth the body of old Salisbury,
And here advance it in the market-place,
The middle centre of this cursed town.
Now have I paid my vow unto his soul
For every drop of blood was drawn from him,
There hath at least five Frenchmen died tonight.
And that hereafter ages may behold
What ruin happen'd in revenge of him,
Within their chiefest temple I'll erect
A tomb, wherein his corpse shall be interr'd:
Upon the which, that every one may read,
Shall be engraved the sack of Orleans,
The treacherous manner of his mournful death
And what a terror he had been to France.
But, lords, in all our bloody massacre,
I muse we met not with the Dauphin's grace,
His new-come champion, virtuous Joan of Arc,
Nor any of his false confederates.
'Tis thought, Lord Talbot, when the fight began,
Roused on the sudden from their drowsy beds,
They did amongst the troops of armed men
Leap o'er the walls for refuge in the field.
Myself, as far as I could well discern
For smoke and dusky vapours of the night,
Am sure I scared the Dauphin and his trull,
When arm in arm they both came swiftly running,
Like to a pair of loving turtle-doves
That could not live asunder day or night.
After that things are set in order here,
We'll follow them with all the power we have.
Enter a Messenger
All hail, my lords! which of this princely train
Call ye the warlike Talbot, for his acts
So much applauded through the realm of France?
Here is the Talbot: who would speak with him?
The virtuous lady, Countess of Auvergne,
With modesty admiring thy renown,
By me entreats, great lord, thou wouldst vouchsafe
To visit her poor castle where she lies,
That she may boast she hath beheld the man
Whose glory fills the world with loud report.
Is it even so? Nay, then, I see our wars
Will turn unto a peaceful comic sport,
When ladies crave to be encounter'd with.
You may not, my lord, despise her gentle suit.
Ne'er trust me then
Could not prevail with all their oratory,
Yet hath a woman's kindness over-ruled:
And therefore tell her I return great thanks,
And in submission will attend on her.
Will not your honours bear me company?
No, truly
And I have heard it said, unbidden guests
Are often welcomest when they are gone.
Well then, alone, since there's no remedy,
I mean to prove this lady's courtesy.
Come hither, captain.
Whispers
You perceive my mind?
I do, my lord, and mean accordingly.
Exeunt
SCENE III. Auvergne. The COUNTESS's castle.
Enter the COUNTESS and her Porter
COUNTESS
Porter, remember what I gave in charge
And when you have done so, bring the keys to me.
Madam, I will.
Exit
COUNTESS
The plot is laid: if all things fall out right,
I shall as famous be by this exploit
As Scythian Tomyris by Cyrus' death.
Great is the rumor of this dreadful knight,
And his achievements of no less account:
Fain would mine eyes be witness with mine ears,
To give their censure of these rare reports.
Enter Messenger and TALBOT
Madam,
According as your ladyship desired,
By message craved, so is Lord Talbot come.
COUNTESS
And he is welcome. What! is this the man?
Madam, it is.
COUNTESS
Is this the scourge of France?
Is this the Talbot, so much fear'd abroad
That with his name the mothers still their babes?
I see report is fabulous and false:
I thought I should have seen some Hercules,
A second Hector, for his grim aspect,
And large proportion of his strong-knit limbs.
Alas, this is a child, a silly dwarf!
It cannot be this weak and writhled shrimp
Should strike such terror to his enemies.
Madam, I have been bold to trouble you
But since your ladyship is not at leisure,
I'll sort some other time to visit you.
COUNTESS
What means he now? Go ask him whither he goes.
Stay, my Lord Talbot
To know the cause of your abrupt departure.
Marry, for that she's in a wrong belief,
I go to certify her Talbot's here.
Re-enter Porter with keys
COUNTESS
If thou be he, then art thou prisoner.
Prisoner! to whom?
COUNTESS
To me, blood-thirsty lord
And for that cause I trained thee to my house.
Long time thy shadow hath been thrall to me,
For in my gallery thy picture hangs:
But now the substance shall endure the like,
And I will chain these legs and arms of thine,
That hast by tyranny these many years
Wasted our country, slain our citizens
And sent our sons and husbands captivate.
Ha, ha, ha!
COUNTESS
Laughest thou, wretch? thy mirth shall turn to moan.
I laugh to see your ladyship so fond
To think that you have aught but Talbot's shadow
Whereon to practise your severity.
COUNTESS
Why, art not thou the man?
I am indeed.
COUNTESS
Then have I substance too.
No, no, I am but shadow of myself:
You are deceived, my substance is not here
For what you see is but the smallest part
And least proportion of humanity:
I tell you, madam, were the whole frame here,
It is of such a spacious lofty pitch,
Your roof were not sufficient to contain't.
COUNTESS
This is a riddling merchant for the nonce
He will be here, and yet he is not here:
How can these contrarieties agree?
That will I show you presently.
Winds his horn. Drums strike up: a peal of ordnance. Enter soldiers
How say you, madam? are you now persuaded
That Talbot is but shadow of himself?
These are his substance, sinews, arms and strength,
With which he yoketh your rebellious necks,
Razeth your cities and subverts your towns
And in a moment makes them desolate.
COUNTESS
Victorious Talbot! pardon my abuse:
I find thou art no less than fame hath bruited
And more than may be gather'd by thy shape.
Let my presumption not provoke thy wrath
For I am sorry that with reverence
I did not entertain thee as thou art.
Be not dismay'd, fair lady
The mind of Talbot, as you did mistake
The outward composition of his body.
What you have done hath not offended me
Nor other satisfaction do I crave,
But only, with your patience, that we may
Taste of your wine and see what cates you have
For soldiers' stomachs always serve them well.
COUNTESS
With all my heart, and think me honoured
To feast so great a warrior in my house.
Exeunt
SCENE IV. London. The Temple-garden.
Enter the Earls of SOMERSET, SUFFOLK, and WARWICK
RICHARD
Great lords and gentlemen, what means this silence?
Dare no man answer in a case of truth?
Within the Temple-hall we were too loud
The garden here is more convenient.
RICHARD
Then say at once if I maintain'd the truth
Or else was wrangling Somerset in the error?
Faith, I have been a truant in the law,
And never yet could frame my will to it
And therefore frame the law unto my will.
Judge you, my Lord of Warwick, then, between us.
Between two hawks, which flies the higher pitch
Between two dogs, which hath the deeper mouth
Between two blades, which bears the better temper:
Between two horses, which doth bear him best
Between two girls, which hath the merriest eye
I have perhaps some shallow spirit of judgement
But in these nice sharp quillets of the law,
Good faith, I am no wiser than a daw.
RICHARD
Tut, tut, here is a mannerly forbearance:
The truth appears so naked on my side
That any purblind eye may find it out.
And on my side it is so well apparell'd,
So clear, so shining and so evident
That it will glimmer through a blind man's eye.
RICHARD
Since you are tongue-tied and so loath to speak,
In dumb significants proclaim your thoughts:
Let him that is a true-born gentleman
And stands upon the honour of his birth,
If he suppose that I have pleaded truth,
From off this brier pluck a white rose with me.
Let him that is no coward nor no flatterer,
But dare maintain the party of the truth,
Pluck a red rose from off this thorn with me.
I love no colours, and without all colour
Of base insinuating flattery
I pluck this white rose with Plantagenet.
I pluck this red rose with young Somerset
And say withal I think he held the right.
Stay, lords and gentlemen, and pluck no more,
Till you conclude that he upon whose side
The fewest roses are cropp'd from the tree
Shall yield the other in the right opinion.
Good Master Vernon, it is well objected:
If I have fewest, I subscribe in silence.
RICHARD
And I.
Then for the truth and plainness of the case.
I pluck this pale and maiden blossom here,
Giving my verdict on the white rose side.
Prick not your finger as you pluck it off,
Lest bleeding you do paint the white rose red
And fall on my side so, against your will.
If I my lord, for my opinion bleed,
Opinion shall be surgeon to my hurt
And keep me on the side where still I am.
Well, well, come on: who else?
Unless my study and my books be false,
The argument you held was wrong in you:
To SOMERSET
In sign whereof I pluck a white rose too.
RICHARD
Now, Somerset, where is your argument?
Here in my scabbard, meditating that
Shall dye your white rose in a bloody red.
RICHARD
Meantime your cheeks do counterfeit our roses
For pale they look with fear, as witnessing
The truth on our side.
No, Plantagenet,
'Tis not for fear but anger that thy cheeks
Blush for pure shame to counterfeit our roses,
And yet thy tongue will not confess thy error.
RICHARD
Hath not thy rose a canker, Somerset?
Hath not thy rose a thorn, Plantagenet?
RICHARD
Ay, sharp and piercing, to maintain his truth
Whiles thy consuming canker eats his falsehood.
Well, I'll find friends to wear my bleeding roses,
That shall maintain what I have said is true,
Where false Plantagenet dare not be seen.
RICHARD
Now, by this maiden blossom in my hand,
I scorn thee and thy fashion, peevish boy.
Turn not thy scorns this way, Plantagenet.
RICHARD
Proud Pole, I will, and scorn both him and thee.
I'll turn my part thereof into thy throat.
Away, away, good William de la Pole!
We grace the yeoman by conversing with him.
Now, by God's will, thou wrong'st him, Somerset
His grandfather was Lionel Duke of Clarence,
Third son to the third Edward King of England:
Spring crestless yeomen from so deep a root?
RICHARD
He bears him on the place's privilege,
Or durst not, for his craven heart, say thus.
By him that made me, I'll maintain my words
On any plot of ground in Christendom.
Was not thy father, Richard Earl of Cambridge,
For treason executed in our late king's days?
And, by his treason, stand'st not thou attainted,
Corrupted, and exempt from ancient gentry?
His trespass yet lives guilty in thy blood
And, till thou be restored, thou art a yeoman.
RICHARD
My father was attached, not attainted,
Condemn'd to die for treason, but no traitor
And that I'll prove on better men than Somerset,
Were growing time once ripen'd to my will.
For your partaker Pole and you yourself,
I'll note you in my book of memory,
To scourge you for this apprehension:
Look to it well and say you are well warn'd.
Ah, thou shalt find us ready for thee still
And know us by these colours for thy foes,
For these my friends in spite of thee shall wear.
RICHARD
And, by my soul, this pale and angry rose,
As cognizance of my blood-drinking hate,
Will I for ever and my faction wear,
Until it wither with me to my grave
Or flourish to the height of my degree.
Go forward and be choked with thy ambition!
And so farewell until I meet thee next.
Exit
Have with thee, Pole. Farewell, ambitious Richard.
Exit
RICHARD
How I am braved and must perforce endure it!
This blot that they object against your house
Shall be wiped out in the next parliament
Call'd for the truce of Winchester and Gloucester
And if thou be not then created York,
I will not live to be accounted Warwick.
Meantime, in signal of my love to thee,
Against proud Somerset and William Pole,
Will I upon thy party wear this rose:
And here I prophesy: this brawl to-day,
Grown to this faction in the Temple-garden,
Shall send between the red rose and the white
A thousand souls to death and deadly night.
RICHARD
Good Master Vernon, I am bound to you,
That you on my behalf would pluck a flower.
In your behalf still will I wear the same.
And so will I.
RICHARD
Thanks, gentle sir.
Come, let us four to dinner: I dare say
This quarrel will drink blood another day.
Exeunt
SCENE V. The Tower of London.
Enter MORTIMER, brought in a chair, and Gaolers
Kind keepers of my weak decaying age,
Let dying Mortimer here rest himself.
Even like a man new haled from the rack,
So fare my limbs with long imprisonment.
And these grey locks, the pursuivants of death,
Nestor-like aged in an age of care,
Argue the end of Edmund Mortimer.
These eyes, like lamps whose wasting oil is spent,
Wax dim, as drawing to their exigent
Weak shoulders, overborne with burthening grief,
And pithless arms, like to a wither'd vine
That droops his sapless branches to the ground
Yet are these feet, whose strengthless stay is numb,
Unable to support this lump of clay,
Swift-winged with desire to get a grave,
As witting I no other comfort have.
But tell me, keeper, will my nephew come?
Richard Plantagenet, my lord, will come:
We sent unto the Temple, unto his chamber
And answer was return'd that he will come.
Enough: my soul shall then be satisfied.
Poor gentleman! his wrong doth equal mine.
Since Henry Monmouth first began to reign,
Before whose glory I was great in arms,
This loathsome sequestration have I had:
And even since then hath Richard been obscured,
Deprived of honour and inheritance.
But now the arbitrator of despairs,
Just death, kind umpire of men's miseries,
With sweet enlargement doth dismiss me hence:
I would his troubles likewise were expired,
That so he might recover what was lost.
Enter RICHARD PLANTAGENET
My lord, your loving nephew now is come.
Richard Plantagenet, my friend, is he come?
RICHARD
Ay, noble uncle, thus ignobly used,
Your nephew, late despised Richard, comes.
Direct mine arms I may embrace his neck,
And in his bosom spend my latter gasp:
O, tell me when my lips do touch his cheeks,
That I may kindly give one fainting kiss.
And now declare, sweet stem from York's great stock,
Why didst thou say, of late thou wert despised?
RICHARD
First, lean thine aged back against mine arm
And, in that ease, I'll tell thee my disease.
This day, in argument upon a case,
Some words there grew 'twixt Somerset and me
Among which terms he used his lavish tongue
And did upbraid me with my father's death:
Which obloquy set bars before my tongue,
Else with the like I had requited him.
Therefore, good uncle, for my father's sake,
In honour of a true Plantagenet
And for alliance sake, declare the cause
My father, Earl of Cambridge, lost his head.
That cause, fair nephew, that imprison'd me
And hath detain'd me all my flowering youth
Within a loathsome dungeon, there to pine,
Was cursed instrument of his decease.
RICHARD
Discover more at large what cause that was,
For I am ignorant and cannot guess.
I will, if that my fading breath permit
And death approach not ere my tale be done.
Henry the Fourth, grandfather to this king,
Deposed his nephew Richard, Edward's son,
The first-begotten and the lawful heir,
Of Edward king, the third of that descent:
During whose reign the Percies of the north,
Finding his usurpation most unjust,
Endeavor'd my advancement to the throne:
The reason moved these warlike lords to this
Was, for that--young King Richard thus removed,
Leaving no heir begotten of his body--
I was the next by birth and parentage
For by my mother I derived am
From Lionel Duke of Clarence, the third son
To King Edward the Third
From John of Gaunt doth bring his pedigree,
Being but fourth of that heroic line.
But mark: as in this haughty attempt
They laboured to plant the rightful heir,
I lost my liberty and they their lives.
Long after this, when Henry the Fifth,
Succeeding his father Bolingbroke, did reign,
Thy father, Earl of Cambridge, then derived
From famous Edmund Langley, Duke of York,
Marrying my sister that thy mother was,
Again in pity of my hard distress
Levied an army, weening to redeem
And have install'd me in the diadem:
But, as the rest, so fell that noble earl
And was beheaded. Thus the Mortimers,
In whom the tide rested, were suppress'd.
RICHARD
Of which, my lord, your honour is the last.
True
And that my fainting words do warrant death
Thou art my heir
But yet be wary in thy studious care.
RICHARD
Thy grave admonishments prevail with me:
But yet, methinks, my father's execution
Was nothing less than bloody tyranny.
With silence, nephew, be thou politic:
Strong-fixed is the house of Lancaster,
And like a mountain, not to be removed.
But now thy uncle is removing hence:
As princes do their courts, when they are cloy'd
With long continuance in a settled place.
RICHARD
O, uncle, would some part of my young years
Might but redeem the passage of your age!
Thou dost then wrong me, as that slaughterer doth
Which giveth many wounds when one will kill.
Mourn not, except thou sorrow for my good
Only give order for my funeral:
And so farewell, and fair be all thy hopes
And prosperous be thy life in peace and war!
Dies
RICHARD
And peace, no war, befall thy parting soul!
In prison hast thou spent a pilgrimage
And like a hermit overpass'd thy days.
Well, I will lock his counsel in my breast
And what I do imagine let that rest.
Keepers, convey him hence, and I myself
Will see his burial better than his life.
Exeunt Gaolers, bearing out the body of MORTIMER
Here dies the dusky torch of Mortimer,
Choked with ambition of the meaner sort:
And for those wrongs, those bitter injuries,
Which Somerset hath offer'd to my house:
I doubt not but with honour to redress
And therefore haste I to the parliament,
Either to be restored to my blood,
Or make my ill the advantage of my good.
Exit
ACT III
SCENE I. London. The Parliament-house.
Flourish. Enter KING HENRY VI, EXETER, GLOUCESTER,  WARWICK, SOMERSET, and SUFFOLK
BISHOP
Comest thou with deep premeditated lines,
With written pamphlets studiously devised,
Humphrey of Gloucester? If thou canst accuse,
Or aught intend'st to lay unto my charge,
Do it without invention, suddenly
As I with sudden and extemporal speech
Purpose to answer what thou canst object.
Presumptuous priest! this place commands my patience,
Or thou shouldst find thou hast dishonour'd me.
Think not, although in writing I preferr'd
The manner of thy vile outrageous crimes,
That therefore I have forged, or am not able
Verbatim to rehearse the method of my pen:
No, prelate
Thy lewd, pestiferous and dissentious pranks,
As very infants prattle of thy pride.
Thou art a most pernicious usurer,
Forward by nature, enemy to peace
Lascivious, wanton, more than well beseems
A man of thy profession and degree
And for thy treachery, what's more manifest?
In that thou laid'st a trap to take my life,
As well at London bridge as at the Tower.
Beside, I fear me, if thy thoughts were sifted,
The king, thy sovereign, is not quite exempt
From envious malice of thy swelling heart.
BISHOP
Gloucester, I do defy thee. Lords, vouchsafe
To give me hearing what I shall reply.
If I were covetous, ambitious or perverse,
As he will have me, how am I so poor?
Or how haps it I seek not to advance
Or raise myself, but keep my wonted calling?
And for dissension, who preferreth peace
More than I do?--except I be provoked.
No, my good lords, it is not that offends
It is not that that hath incensed the duke:
It is, because no one should sway but he
No one but he should be about the king
And that engenders thunder in his breast
And makes him roar these accusations forth.
But he shall know I am as good--
As good!
Thou bastard of my grandfather!
BISHOP
Ay, lordly sir
But one imperious in another's throne?
Am I not protector, saucy priest?
BISHOP
And am not I a prelate of the church?
Yes, as an outlaw in a castle keeps
And useth it to patronage his theft.
BISHOP
Unreverent Gloster!
Thou art reverent
Touching thy spiritual function, not thy life.
BISHOP
Rome shall remedy this.
Roam thither, then.
My lord, it were your duty to forbear.
Ay, see the bishop be not overborne.
Methinks my lord should be religious
And know the office that belongs to such.
Methinks his lordship should be humbler
it fitteth not a prelate so to plead.
Yes, when his holy state is touch'd so near.
State holy or unhallow'd, what of that?
Is not his grace protector to the king?
RICHARD
[Aside]  Plantagenet, I see, must hold his tongue,
Lest it be said 'Speak, sirrah, when you should
Must your bold verdict enter talk with lords?'
Else would I have a fling at Winchester.
Uncles of Gloucester and of Winchester,
The special watchmen of our English weal,
I would prevail, if prayers might prevail,
To join your hearts in love and amity.
O, what a scandal is it to our crown,
That two such noble peers as ye should jar!
Believe me, lords, my tender years can tell
Civil dissension is a viperous worm
That gnaws the bowels of the commonwealth.
A noise within, 'Down with the tawny-coats!'
What tumult's this?
An uproar, I dare warrant,
Begun through malice of the bishop's men.
A noise again, 'Stones! stones!' Enter Mayor
O, my good lords, and virtuous Henry,
Pity the city of London, pity us!
The bishop and the Duke of Gloucester's men,
Forbidden late to carry any weapon,
Have fill'd their pockets full of pebble stones
And banding themselves in contrary parts
Do pelt so fast at one another's pate
That many have their giddy brains knock'd out:
Our windows are broke down in every street
And we for fear compell'd to shut our shops.
Enter Serving-men, in skirmish, with bloody pates
We charge you, on allegiance to ourself,
To hold your slaughtering hands and keep the peace.
Pray, uncle Gloucester, mitigate this strife.
First Serving-man	Nay, if we be forbidden stones,
We'll fall to it with our teeth.
Second Serving-man	Do what ye dare, we are as resolute.
Skirmish again
You of my household, leave this peevish broil
And set this unaccustom'd fight aside.
Third Serving-man	My lord, we know your grace to be a man
Just and upright
Inferior to none but to his majesty:
And ere that we will suffer such a prince,
So kind a father of the commonweal,
To be disgraced by an inkhorn mate,
We and our wives and children all will fight
And have our bodies slaughtered by thy foes.
First Serving-man	Ay, and the very parings of our nails
Shall pitch a field when we are dead.
Begin again
Stay, stay, I say!
And if you love me, as you say you do,
Let me persuade you to forbear awhile.
O, how this discord doth afflict my soul!
Can you, my Lord of Winchester, behold
My sighs and tears and will not once relent?
Who should be pitiful, if you be not?
Or who should study to prefer a peace.
If holy churchmen take delight in broils?
Yield, my lord protector
Except you mean with obstinate repulse
To slay your sovereign and destroy the realm.
You see what mischief and what murder too
Hath been enacted through your enmity
Then be at peace except ye thirst for blood.
BISHOP
He shall submit, or I will never yield.
Compassion on the king commands me stoop
Or I would see his heart out, ere the priest
Should ever get that privilege of me.
Behold, my Lord of Winchester, the duke
Hath banish'd moody discontented fury,
As by his smoothed brows it doth appear:
Why look you still so stern and tragical?
Here, Winchester, I offer thee my hand.
Fie, uncle Beaufort! I have heard you preach
That malice was a great and grievous sin
And will not you maintain the thing you teach,
But prove a chief offender in the same?
Sweet king! the bishop hath a kindly gird.
For shame, my lord of Winchester, relent!
What, shall a child instruct you what to do?
BISHOP
Well, Duke of Gloucester, I will yield to thee
Love for thy love and hand for hand I give.
[Aside]  Ay, but, I fear me, with a hollow heart.--
See here, my friends and loving countrymen,
This token serveth for a flag of truce
Betwixt ourselves and all our followers:
So help me God, as I dissemble not!
BISHOP
[Aside]  So help me God, as I intend it not!
O, loving uncle, kind Duke of Gloucester,
How joyful am I made by this contract!
Away, my masters! trouble us no more
But join in friendship, as your lords have done.
First Serving-man	Content: I'll to the surgeon's.
Second Serving-man	And so will I.
Third Serving-man	And I will see what physic the tavern affords.
Exeunt Serving-men, Mayor,  and c
Accept this scroll, most gracious sovereign,
Which in the right of Richard Plantagenet
We do exhibit to your majesty.
Well urged, my Lord of Warwick: or sweet prince,
And if your grace mark every circumstance,
You have great reason to do Richard right
Especially for those occasions
At Eltham Place I told your majesty.
And those occasions, uncle, were of force:
Therefore, my loving lords, our pleasure is
That Richard be restored to his blood.
Let Richard be restored to his blood
So shall his father's wrongs be recompensed.
BISHOP
As will the rest, so willeth Winchester.
If Richard will be true, not that alone
But all the whole inheritance I give
That doth belong unto the house of York,
From whence you spring by lineal descent.
RICHARD
Thy humble servant vows obedience
And humble service till the point of death.
Stoop then and set your knee against my foot
And, in reguerdon of that duty done,
I gird thee with the valiant sword of York:
Rise Richard, like a true Plantagenet,
And rise created princely Duke of York.
RICHARD
And so thrive Richard as thy foes may fall!
And as my duty springs, so perish they
That grudge one thought against your majesty!
Welcome, high prince, the mighty Duke of York!
[Aside]  Perish, base prince, ignoble Duke of York!
Now will it best avail your majesty
To cross the seas and to be crown'd in France:
The presence of a king engenders love
Amongst his subjects and his loyal friends,
As it disanimates his enemies.
When Gloucester says the word, King Henry goes
For friendly counsel cuts off many foes.
Your ships already are in readiness.
Sennet. Flourish. Exeunt all but EXETER
Ay, we may march in England or in France,
Not seeing what is likely to ensue.
This late dissension grown betwixt the peers
Burns under feigned ashes of forged love
And will at last break out into a flame:
As fester'd members rot but by degree,
Till bones and flesh and sinews fall away,
So will this base and envious discord breed.
And now I fear that fatal prophecy
Which in the time of Henry named the Fifth
Was in the mouth of every sucking babe
That Henry born at Monmouth should win all
And Henry born at Windsor lose all:
Which is so plain that Exeter doth wish
His days may finish ere that hapless time.
Exit
SCENE II. France. Before Rouen.
Enter JOAN LA PUCELLE disguised, with four Soldiers with sacks upon their backs
These are the city gates, the gates of Rouen,
Through which our policy must make a breach:
Take heed, be wary how you place your words
Talk like the vulgar sort of market men
That come to gather money for their corn.
If we have entrance, as I hope we shall,
And that we find the slothful watch but weak,
I'll by a sign give notice to our friends,
That Charles the Dauphin may encounter them.
Our sacks shall be a mean to sack the city,
And we be lords and rulers over Rouen
Therefore we'll knock.
Knocks
[Within]  Qui est la?
Paysans, pauvres gens de France
Poor market folks that come to sell their corn.
Enter, go in
Now, Rouen, I'll shake thy bulwarks to the ground.
Exeunt
Enter CHARLES, the BASTARD OF ORLEANS, ALENCON, REIGNIER, and forces
Saint Denis bless this happy stratagem!
And once again we'll sleep secure in Rouen.
Here enter'd Pucelle and her practisants
Now she is there, how will she specify
Where is the best and safest passage in?
By thrusting out a torch from yonder tower
Which, once discern'd, shows that her meaning is,
No way to that, for weakness, which she enter'd.
Enter JOAN LA PUCELLE on the top, thrusting out a torch burning
Behold, this is the happy wedding torch
That joineth Rouen unto her countrymen,
But burning fatal to the Talbotites!
Exit
See, noble Charles, the beacon of our friend
The burning torch in yonder turret stands.
Now shine it like a comet of revenge,
A prophet to the fall of all our foes!
Defer no time, delays have dangerous ends
Enter, and cry 'The Dauphin!' presently,
And then do execution on the watch.
Alarum. Exeunt
An alarum. Enter TALBOT in an excursion
France, thou shalt rue this treason with thy tears,
If Talbot but survive thy treachery.
Pucelle, that witch, that damned sorceress,
Hath wrought this hellish mischief unawares,
That hardly we escaped the pride of France.
Exit
An alarum: excursions. BEDFORD, brought in sick  in a chair. Enter TALBOT and BURGUNDY without:  within JOAN LA PUCELLE, CHARLES, BASTARD OF ORLEANS, ALENCON, and REIGNIER, on the walls
Good morrow, gallants! want ye corn for bread?
I think the Duke of Burgundy will fast
Before he'll buy again at such a rate:
'Twas full of darnel
Scoff on, vile fiend and shameless courtezan!
I trust ere long to choke thee with thine own
And make thee curse the harvest of that corn.
Your grace may starve perhaps before that time.
O, let no words, but deeds, revenge this treason!
What will you do, good grey-beard? break a lance,
And run a tilt at death within a chair?
Foul fiend of France, and hag of all despite,
Encompass'd with thy lustful paramours!
Becomes it thee to taunt his valiant age
And twit with cowardice a man half dead?
Damsel, I'll have a bout with you again,
Or else let Talbot perish with this shame.
Are ye so hot, sir? yet, Pucelle, hold thy peace
If Talbot do but thunder, rain will follow.
The English whisper together in council
God speed the parliament! who shall be the speaker?
Dare ye come forth and meet us in the field?
Belike your lordship takes us then for fools,
To try if that our own be ours or no.
I speak not to that railing Hecate,
But unto thee, Alencon, and the rest
Will ye, like soldiers, come and fight it out?
Signior, no.
Signior, hang! base muleters of France!
Like peasant foot-boys do they keep the walls
And dare not take up arms like gentlemen.
Away, captains! let's get us from the walls
For Talbot means no goodness by his looks.
God be wi' you, my lord! we came but to tell you
That we are here.
Exeunt from the walls
And there will we be too, ere it be long,
Or else reproach be Talbot's greatest fame!
Vow, Burgundy, by honour of thy house,
Prick'd on by public wrongs sustain'd in France,
Either to get the town again or die:
And I, as sure as English Henry lives
And as his father here was conqueror,
As sure as in this late-betrayed town
Great Coeur-de-lion's heart was buried,
So sure I swear to get the town or die.
My vows are equal partners with thy vows.
But, ere we go, regard this dying prince,
The valiant Duke of Bedford. Come, my lord,
We will bestow you in some better place,
Fitter for sickness and for crazy age.
Lord Talbot, do not so dishonour me:
Here will I sit before the walls of Rouen
And will be partner of your weal or woe.
Courageous Bedford, let us now persuade you.
Not to be gone from hence
That stout Pendragon in his litter sick
Came to the field and vanquished his foes:
Methinks I should revive the soldiers' hearts,
Because I ever found them as myself.
Undaunted spirit in a dying breast!
Then be it so: heavens keep old Bedford safe!
And now no more ado, brave Burgundy,
But gather we our forces out of hand
And set upon our boasting enemy.
Exeunt all but BEDFORD and Attendants
An alarum: excursions. Enter FASTOLFE and a Captain
Whither away, Sir John Fastolfe, in such haste?
Whither away! to save myself by flight:
We are like to have the overthrow again.
What! will you fly, and leave Lord Talbot?
Ay,
All the Talbots in the world, to save my life!
Exit
Cowardly knight! ill fortune follow thee!
Exit
Retreat: excursions. JOAN LA PUCELLE, ALENCON, and CHARLES fly
Now, quiet soul, depart when heaven please,
For I have seen our enemies' overthrow.
What is the trust or strength of foolish man?
They that of late were daring with their scoffs
Are glad and fain by flight to save themselves.
BEDFORD dies, and is carried in by two in his chair
An alarum. Re-enter TALBOT, BURGUNDY, and the rest
Lost, and recover'd in a day again!
This is a double honour, Burgundy:
Yet heavens have glory for this victory!
Warlike and martial Talbot, Burgundy
Enshrines thee in his heart and there erects
Thy noble deeds as valour's monuments.
Thanks, gentle duke. But where is Pucelle now?
I think her old familiar is asleep:
Now where's the Bastard's braves, and Charles his gleeks?
What, all amort? Rouen hangs her head for grief
That such a valiant company are fled.
Now will we take some order in the town,
Placing therein some expert officers,
And then depart to Paris to the king,
For there young Henry with his nobles lie.
What wills Lord Talbot pleaseth Burgundy.
But yet, before we go, let's not forget
The noble Duke of Bedford late deceased,
But see his exequies fulfill'd in Rouen:
A braver soldier never couched lance,
A gentler heart did never sway in court
But kings and mightiest potentates must die,
For that's the end of human misery.
Exeunt
SCENE III. The plains near Rouen.
Enter CHARLES, the BASTARD OF ORLEANS, ALENCON, JOAN LA PUCELLE, and forces
Dismay not, princes, at this accident,
Nor grieve that Rouen is so recovered:
Care is no cure, but rather corrosive,
For things that are not to be remedied.
Let frantic Talbot triumph for a while
And like a peacock sweep along his tail
We'll pull his plumes and take away his train,
If Dauphin and the rest will be but ruled.
We have been guided by thee hitherto,
And of thy cunning had no diffidence:
One sudden foil shall never breed distrust.
Search out thy wit for secret policies,
And we will make thee famous through the world.
We'll set thy statue in some holy place,
And have thee reverenced like a blessed saint:
Employ thee then, sweet virgin, for our good.
Then thus it must be
By fair persuasions mix'd with sugar'd words
We will entice the Duke of Burgundy
To leave the Talbot and to follow us.
Ay, marry, sweeting, if we could do that,
France were no place for Henry's warriors
Nor should that nation boast it so with us,
But be extirped from our provinces.
For ever should they be expulsed from France
And not have title of an earldom here.
Your honours shall perceive how I will work
To bring this matter to the wished end.
Drum sounds afar off
Hark! by the sound of drum you may perceive
Their powers are marching unto Paris-ward.
Here sound an English march. Enter, and pass over at a distance, TALBOT and his forces
There goes the Talbot, with his colours spread,
And all the troops of English after him.
French march. Enter BURGUNDY and forces
Now in the rearward comes the duke and his:
Fortune in favour makes him lag behind.
Summon a parley
Trumpets sound a parley
A parley with the Duke of Burgundy!
Who craves a parley with the Burgundy?
The princely Charles of France, thy countryman.
What say'st thou, Charles? for I am marching hence.
Speak, Pucelle, and enchant him with thy words.
Brave Burgundy, undoubted hope of France!
Stay, let thy humble handmaid speak to thee.
Speak on
Look on thy country, look on fertile France,
And see the cities and the towns defaced
By wasting ruin of the cruel foe.
As looks the mother on her lowly babe
When death doth close his tender dying eyes,
See, see the pining malady of France
Behold the wounds, the most unnatural wounds,
Which thou thyself hast given her woful breast.
O, turn thy edged sword another way
Strike those that hurt, and hurt not those that help.
One drop of blood drawn from thy country's bosom
Should grieve thee more than streams of foreign gore:
Return thee therefore with a flood of tears,
And wash away thy country's stained spots.
Either she hath bewitch'd me with her words,
Or nature makes me suddenly relent.
Besides, all French and France exclaims on thee,
Doubting thy birth and lawful progeny.
Who joint'st thou with but with a lordly nation
That will not trust thee but for profit's sake?
When Talbot hath set footing once in France
And fashion'd thee that instrument of ill,
Who then but English Henry will be lord
And thou be thrust out like a fugitive?
Call we to mind, and mark but this for proof,
Was not the Duke of Orleans thy foe?
And was he not in England prisoner?
But when they heard he was thine enemy,
They set him free without his ransom paid,
In spite of Burgundy and all his friends.
See, then, thou fight'st against thy countrymen
And joint'st with them will be thy slaughtermen.
Come, come, return
Charles and the rest will take thee in their arms.
I am vanquished
Have batter'd me like roaring cannon-shot,
And made me almost yield upon my knees.
Forgive me, country, and sweet countrymen,
And, lords, accept this hearty kind embrace:
My forces and my power of men are yours:
So farewell, Talbot
[Aside]  Done like a Frenchman: turn, and turn again!
Welcome, brave duke! thy friendship makes us fresh.
And doth beget new courage in our breasts.
Pucelle hath bravely play'd her part in this,
And doth deserve a coronet of gold.
Now let us on, my lords, and join our powers,
And seek how we may prejudice the foe.
Exeunt
SCENE IV. Paris. The palace.
Enter KING HENRY VI, GLOUCESTER, BISHOP OF  WINCHESTER, YORK, SUFFOLK, SOMERSET, WARWICK,  EXETER, VERNON	BASSET, and others. To them with his Soldiers, TALBOT
My gracious prince, and honourable peers,
Hearing of your arrival in this realm,
I have awhile given truce unto my wars,
To do my duty to my sovereign:
In sign, whereof, this arm, that hath reclaim'd
To your obedience fifty fortresses,
Twelve cities and seven walled towns of strength,
Beside five hundred prisoners of esteem,
Lets fall his sword before your highness' feet,
And with submissive loyalty of heart
Ascribes the glory of his conquest got
First to my God and next unto your grace.
Kneels
Is this the Lord Talbot, uncle Gloucester,
That hath so long been resident in France?
Yes, if it please your majesty, my liege.
Welcome, brave captain and victorious lord!
When I was young, as yet I am not old,
I do remember how my father said
A stouter champion never handled sword.
Long since we were resolved of your truth,
Your faithful service and your toil in war
Yet never have you tasted our reward,
Or been reguerdon'd with so much as thanks,
Because till now we never saw your face:
Therefore, stand up
We here create you Earl of Shrewsbury
And in our coronation take your place.
Sennet. Flourish. Exeunt all but VERNON and BASSET
Now, sir, to you, that were so hot at sea,
Disgracing of these colours that I wear
In honour of my noble Lord of York:
Darest thou maintain the former words thou spakest?
Yes, sir
The envious barking of your saucy tongue
Against my lord the Duke of Somerset.
Sirrah, thy lord I honour as he is.
Why, what is he? as good a man as York.
Hark ye
Strikes him
Villain, thou know'st the law of arms is such
That whoso draws a sword, 'tis present death,
Or else this blow should broach thy dearest blood.
But I'll unto his majesty, and crave
I may have liberty to venge this wrong
When thou shalt see I'll meet thee to thy cost.
Well, miscreant, I'll be there as soon as you
And, after, meet you sooner than you would.
Exeunt
ACT IV
SCENE I. Paris. A hall of state.
Enter KING HENRY VI, GLOUCESTER, BISHOP OF  WINCHESTER, YORK, SUFFOLK, SOMERSET, WARWICK, TALBOT, EXETER, the Governor, of Paris, and others
Lord bishop, set the crown upon his head.
BISHOP
God save King Henry, of that name the sixth!
Now, governor of Paris, take your oath,
That you elect no other king but him
Esteem none friends but such as are his friends,
And none your foes but such as shall pretend
Malicious practises against his state:
This shall ye do, so help you righteous God!
Enter FASTOLFE
My gracious sovereign, as I rode from Calais,
To haste unto your coronation,
A letter was deliver'd to my hands,
Writ to your grace from the Duke of Burgundy.
Shame to the Duke of Burgundy and thee!
I vow'd, base knight, when I did meet thee next,
To tear the garter from thy craven's leg,
Plucking it off
Which I have done, because unworthily
Thou wast installed in that high degree.
Pardon me, princely Henry, and the rest
This dastard, at the battle of Patay,
When but in all I was six thousand strong
And that the French were almost ten to one,
Before we met or that a stroke was given,
Like to a trusty squire did run away:
In which assault we lost twelve hundred men
Myself and divers gentlemen beside
Were there surprised and taken prisoners.
Then judge, great lords, if I have done amiss
Or whether that such cowards ought to wear
This ornament of knighthood, yea or no.
To say the truth, this fact was infamous
And ill beseeming any common man,
Much more a knight, a captain and a leader.
When first this order was ordain'd, my lords,
Knights of the garter were of noble birth,
Valiant and virtuous, full of haughty courage,
Such as were grown to credit by the wars
Not fearing death, nor shrinking for distress,
But always resolute in most extremes.
He then that is not furnish'd in this sort
Doth but usurp the sacred name of knight,
Profaning this most honourable order,
And should, if I were worthy to be judge,
Be quite degraded, like a hedge-born swain
That doth presume to boast of gentle blood.
Stain to thy countrymen, thou hear'st thy doom!
Be packing, therefore, thou that wast a knight:
Henceforth we banish thee, on pain of death.
Exit FASTOLFE
And now, my lord protector, view the letter
Sent from our uncle Duke of Burgundy.
What means his grace, that he hath changed his style?
No more but, plain and bluntly, 'To the king!'
Hath he forgot he is his sovereign?
Or doth this churlish superscription
Pretend some alteration in good will?
What's here?
Reads
'I have, upon especial cause,
Moved with compassion of my country's wreck,
Together with the pitiful complaints
Of such as your oppression feeds upon,
Forsaken your pernicious faction
And join'd with Charles, the rightful King of France.'
O monstrous treachery! can this be so,
That in alliance, amity and oaths,
There should be found such false dissembling guile?
What! doth my uncle Burgundy revolt?
He doth, my lord, and is become your foe.
Is that the worst this letter doth contain?
It is the worst, and all, my lord, he writes.
Why, then, Lord Talbot there shall talk with him
And give him chastisement for this abuse.
How say you, my lord? are you not content?
Content, my liege! yes, but that I am prevented,
I should have begg'd I might have been employ'd.
Then gather strength and march unto him straight:
Let him perceive how ill we brook his treason
And what offence it is to flout his friends.
I go, my lord, in heart desiring still
You may behold confusion of your foes.
Exit
Enter VERNON and BASSET
Grant me the combat, gracious sovereign.
And me, my lord, grant me the combat too.
This is my servant: hear him, noble prince.
And this is mine: sweet Henry, favour him.
Be patient, lords
Say, gentlemen, what makes you thus exclaim?
And wherefore crave you combat? or with whom?
With him, my lord
And I with him
What is that wrong whereof you both complain?
First let me know, and then I'll answer you.
Crossing the sea from England into France,
This fellow here, with envious carping tongue,
Upbraided me about the rose I wear
Saying, the sanguine colour of the leaves
Did represent my master's blushing cheeks,
When stubbornly he did repugn the truth
About a certain question in the law
Argued betwixt the Duke of York and him
With other vile and ignominious terms:
In confutation of which rude reproach
And in defence of my lord's worthiness,
I crave the benefit of law of arms.
And that is my petition, noble lord:
For though he seem with forged quaint conceit
To set a gloss upon his bold intent,
Yet know, my lord, I was provoked by him
And he first took exceptions at this badge,
Pronouncing that the paleness of this flower
Bewray'd the faintness of my master's heart.
Will not this malice, Somerset, be left?
Your private grudge, my Lord of York, will out,
Though ne'er so cunningly you smother it.
Good Lord, what madness rules in brainsick men,
When for so slight and frivolous a cause
Such factious emulations shall arise!
Good cousins both, of York and Somerset,
Quiet yourselves, I pray, and be at peace.
Let this dissension first be tried by fight,
And then your highness shall command a peace.
The quarrel toucheth none but us alone
Betwixt ourselves let us decide it then.
There is my pledge
Nay, let it rest where it began at first.
Confirm it so, mine honourable lord.
Confirm it so! Confounded be your strife!
And perish ye, with your audacious prate!
Presumptuous vassals, are you not ashamed
With this immodest clamorous outrage
To trouble and disturb the king and us?
And you, my lords, methinks you do not well
To bear with their perverse objections
Much less to take occasion from their mouths
To raise a mutiny betwixt yourselves:
Let me persuade you take a better course.
It grieves his highness: good my lords, be friends.
Come hither, you that would be combatants:
Henceforth I charge you, as you love our favour,
Quite to forget this quarrel and the cause.
And you, my lords, remember where we are,
In France, amongst a fickle wavering nation:
If they perceive dissension in our looks
And that within ourselves we disagree,
How will their grudging stomachs be provoked
To wilful disobedience, and rebel!
Beside, what infamy will there arise,
When foreign princes shall be certified
That for a toy, a thing of no regard,
King Henry's peers and chief nobility
Destroy'd themselves, and lost the realm of France!
O, think upon the conquest of my father,
My tender years, and let us not forego
That for a trifle that was bought with blood
Let me be umpire in this doubtful strife.
I see no reason, if I wear this rose,
Putting on a red rose
That any one should therefore be suspicious
I more incline to Somerset than York:
Both are my kinsmen, and I love them both:
As well they may upbraid me with my crown,
Because, forsooth, the king of Scots is crown'd.
But your discretions better can persuade
Than I am able to instruct or teach:
And therefore, as we hither came in peace,
So let us still continue peace and love.
Cousin of York, we institute your grace
To be our regent in these parts of France:
And, good my Lord of Somerset, unite
Your troops of horsemen with his bands of foot
And, like true subjects, sons of your progenitors,
Go cheerfully together and digest.
Your angry choler on your enemies.
Ourself, my lord protector and the rest
After some respite will return to Calais
From thence to England
To be presented, by your victories,
With Charles, Alencon and that traitorous rout.
Flourish. Exeunt all but YORK, WARWICK, EXETER and VERNON
My Lord of York, I promise you, the king
Prettily, methought, did play the orator.
And so he did
In that he wears the badge of Somerset.
Tush, that was but his fancy, blame him not
I dare presume, sweet prince, he thought no harm.
An if I wist he did,--but let it rest
Other affairs must now be managed.
Exeunt all but EXETER
Well didst thou, Richard, to suppress thy voice
For, had the passions of thy heart burst out,
I fear we should have seen decipher'd there
More rancorous spite, more furious raging broils,
Than yet can be imagined or supposed.
But howsoe'er, no simple man that sees
This jarring discord of nobility,
This shouldering of each other in the court,
This factious bandying of their favourites,
But that it doth presage some ill event.
'Tis much when sceptres are in children's hands
But more when envy breeds unkind division
There comes the rain, there begins confusion.
Exit
SCENE II. Before Bourdeaux.
Enter TALBOT, with trump and drum
Go to the gates of Bourdeaux, trumpeter:
Summon their general unto the wall.
Trumpet sounds. Enter General and others, aloft
English John Talbot, captains, calls you forth,
Servant in arms to Harry King of England
And thus he would: Open your city gates
Be humble to us
And do him homage as obedient subjects
And I'll withdraw me and my bloody power:
But, if you frown upon this proffer'd peace,
You tempt the fury of my three attendants,
Lean famine, quartering steel, and climbing fire
Who in a moment even with the earth
Shall lay your stately and air-braving towers,
If you forsake the offer of their love.
Thou ominous and fearful owl of death,
Our nation's terror and their bloody scourge!
The period of thy tyranny approacheth.
On us thou canst not enter but by death
For, I protest, we are well fortified
And strong enough to issue out and fight:
If thou retire, the Dauphin, well appointed,
Stands with the snares of war to tangle thee:
On either hand thee there are squadrons pitch'd,
To wall thee from the liberty of flight
And no way canst thou turn thee for redress,
But death doth front thee with apparent spoil
And pale destruction meets thee in the face.
Ten thousand French have ta'en the sacrament
To rive their dangerous artillery
Upon no Christian soul but English Talbot.
Lo, there thou stand'st, a breathing valiant man,
Of an invincible unconquer'd spirit!
This is the latest glory of thy praise
That I, thy enemy, due thee withal
For ere the glass, that now begins to run,
Finish the process of his sandy hour,
These eyes, that see thee now well coloured,
Shall see thee wither'd, bloody, pale and dead.
Drum afar off
Hark! hark! the Dauphin's drum, a warning bell,
Sings heavy music to thy timorous soul
And mine shall ring thy dire departure out.
Exeunt General,  and c
He fables not
Out, some light horsemen, and peruse their wings.
O, negligent and heedless discipline!
How are we park'd and bounded in a pale,
A little herd of England's timorous deer,
Mazed with a yelping kennel of French curs!
If we be English deer, be then in blood
Not rascal-like, to fall down with a pinch,
But rather, moody-mad and desperate stags,
Turn on the bloody hounds with heads of steel
And make the cowards stand aloof at bay:
Sell every man his life as dear as mine,
And they shall find dear deer of us, my friends.
God and Saint George, Talbot and England's right,
Prosper our colours in this dangerous fight!
Exeunt
SCENE III. Plains in Gascony.
Enter a Messenger that meets YORK. Enter YORK with trumpet and many Soldiers
Are not the speedy scouts return'd again,
That dogg'd the mighty army of the Dauphin?
They are return'd, my lord, and give it out
That he is march'd to Bourdeaux with his power,
To fight with Talbot: as he march'd along,
By your espials were discovered
Two mightier troops than that the Dauphin led,
Which join'd with him and made their march for Bourdeaux.
A plague upon that villain Somerset,
That thus delays my promised supply
Of horsemen, that were levied for this siege!
Renowned Talbot doth expect my aid,
And I am lowted by a traitor villain
And cannot help the noble chevalier:
God comfort him in this necessity!
If he miscarry, farewell wars in France.
Enter Sir William LUCY
Thou princely leader of our English strength,
Never so needful on the earth of France,
Spur to the rescue of the noble Talbot,
Who now is girdled with a waist of iron
And hemm'd about with grim destruction:
To Bourdeaux, warlike duke! to Bourdeaux, York!
Else, farewell Talbot, France, and England's honour.
O God, that Somerset, who in proud heart
Doth stop my cornets, were in Talbot's place!
So should we save a valiant gentleman
By forfeiting a traitor and a coward.
Mad ire and wrathful fury makes me weep,
That thus we die, while remiss traitors sleep.
O, send some succor to the distress'd lord!
He dies, we lose
We mourn, France smiles
All 'long of this vile traitor Somerset.
Then God take mercy on brave Talbot's soul
And on his son young John, who two hours since
I met in travel toward his warlike father!
This seven years did not Talbot see his son
And now they meet where both their lives are done.
Alas, what joy shall noble Talbot have
To bid his young son welcome to his grave?
Away! vexation almost stops my breath,
That sunder'd friends greet in the hour of death.
Lucy, farewell
But curse the cause I cannot aid the man.
Maine, Blois, Poictiers, and Tours, are won away,
'Long all of Somerset and his delay.
Exit, with his soldiers
Thus, while the vulture of sedition
Feeds in the bosom of such great commanders,
Sleeping neglection doth betray to loss
The conquest of our scarce cold conqueror,
That ever living man of memory,
Henry the Fifth: whiles they each other cross,
Lives, honours, lands and all hurry to loss.
Exit
SCENE IV. Other plains in Gascony.
Enter SOMERSET, with his army
It is too late
This expedition was by York and Talbot
Too rashly plotted: all our general force
Might with a sally of the very town
Be buckled with: the over-daring Talbot
Hath sullied all his gloss of former honour
By this unheedful, desperate, wild adventure:
York set him on to fight and die in shame,
That, Talbot dead, great York might bear the name.
Here is Sir William Lucy, who with me
Set from our o'ermatch'd forces forth for aid.
Enter Sir William LUCY
How now, Sir William! whither were you sent?
Whither, my lord? from bought and sold Lord Talbot
Who, ring'd about with bold adversity,
Cries out for noble York and Somerset,
To beat assailing death from his weak legions:
And whiles the honourable captain there
Drops bloody sweat from his war-wearied limbs,
And, in advantage lingering, looks for rescue,
You, his false hopes, the trust of England's honour,
Keep off aloof with worthless emulation.
Let not your private discord keep away
The levied succors that should lend him aid,
While he, renowned noble gentleman,
Yields up his life unto a world of odds:
Orleans the Bastard, Charles, Burgundy,
Alencon, Reignier, compass him about,
And Talbot perisheth by your default.
York set him on
And York as fast upon your grace exclaims
Swearing that you withhold his levied host,
Collected for this expedition.
York lies
I owe him little duty, and less love
And take foul scorn to fawn on him by sending.
The fraud of England, not the force of France,
Hath now entrapp'd the noble-minded Talbot:
Never to England shall he bear his life
But dies, betray'd to fortune by your strife.
Come, go
Within six hours they will be at his aid.
Too late comes rescue: he is ta'en or slain
For fly he could not, if he would have fled
And fly would Talbot never, though he might.
If he be dead, brave Talbot, then adieu!
His fame lives in the world, his shame in you.
Exeunt
SCENE V. The English camp near Bourdeaux.
Enter TALBOT and JOHN his son
O young John Talbot! I did send for thee
To tutor thee in stratagems of war,
That Talbot's name might be in thee revived
When sapless age and weak unable limbs
Should bring thy father to his drooping chair.
But, O malignant and ill-boding stars!
Now thou art come unto a feast of death,
A terrible and unavoided danger:
Therefore, dear boy, mount on my swiftest horse
And I'll direct thee how thou shalt escape
By sudden flight: come, dally not, be gone.
Is my name Talbot? and am I your son?
And shall I fly? O if you love my mother,
Dishonour not her honourable name,
To make a bastard and a slave of me!
The world will say, he is not Talbot's blood,
That basely fled when noble Talbot stood.
Fly, to revenge my death, if I be slain.
He that flies so will ne'er return again.
If we both stay, we both are sure to die.
Then let me stay
Your loss is great, so your regard should be
My worth unknown, no loss is known in me.
Upon my death the French can little boast
In yours they will, in you all hopes are lost.
Flight cannot stain the honour you have won
But mine it will, that no exploit have done:
You fled for vantage, everyone will swear
But, if I bow, they'll say it was for fear.
There is no hope that ever I will stay,
If the first hour I shrink and run away.
Here on my knee I beg mortality,
Rather than life preserved with infamy.
Shall all thy mother's hopes lie in one tomb?
Ay, rather than I'll shame my mother's womb.
Upon my blessing, I command thee go.
To fight I will, but not to fly the foe.
Part of thy father may be saved in thee.
No part of him but will be shame in me.
Thou never hadst renown, nor canst not lose it.
Yes, your renowned name: shall flight abuse it?
Thy father's charge shall clear thee from that stain.
You cannot witness for me, being slain.
If death be so apparent, then both fly.
And leave my followers here to fight and die?
My age was never tainted with such shame.
And shall my youth be guilty of such blame?
No more can I be sever'd from your side,
Than can yourself yourself in twain divide:
Stay, go, do what you will, the like do I
For live I will not, if my father die.
Then here I take my leave of thee, fair son,
Born to eclipse thy life this afternoon.
Come, side by side together live and die.
And soul with soul from France to heaven fly.
Exeunt
SCENE VI. A field of battle.
Alarum: excursions, wherein JOHN TALBOT is hemmed about, and TALBOT rescues him
Saint George and victory! fight, soldiers, fight.
The regent hath with Talbot broke his word
And left us to the rage of France his sword.
Where is John Talbot? Pause, and take thy breath
I gave thee life and rescued thee from death.
O, twice my father, twice am I thy son!
The life thou gavest me first was lost and done,
Till with thy warlike sword, despite of late,
To my determined time thou gavest new date.
When from the Dauphin's crest thy sword struck fire,
It warm'd thy father's heart with proud desire
Of bold-faced victory. Then leaden age,
Quicken'd with youthful spleen and warlike rage,
Beat down Alencon, Orleans, Burgundy,
And from the pride of Gallia rescued thee.
The ireful bastard Orleans, that drew blood
From thee, my boy, and had the maidenhood
Of thy first fight, I soon encountered,
And interchanging blows I quickly shed
Some of his bastard blood
Bespoke him thus
And misbegotten blood I spill of thine,
Mean and right poor, for that pure blood of mine
Which thou didst force from Talbot, my brave boy:'
Here, purposing the Bastard to destroy,
Came in strong rescue. Speak, thy father's care,
Art thou not weary, John? how dost thou fare?
Wilt thou yet leave the battle, boy, and fly,
Now thou art seal'd the son of chivalry?
Fly, to revenge my death when I am dead:
The help of one stands me in little stead.
O, too much folly is it, well I wot,
To hazard all our lives in one small boat!
If I to-day die not with Frenchmen's rage,
To-morrow I shall die with mickle age:
By me they nothing gain an if I stay
'Tis but the shortening of my life one day:
In thee thy mother dies, our household's name,
My death's revenge, thy youth, and England's fame:
All these and more we hazard by thy stay
All these are saved if thou wilt fly away.
The sword of Orleans hath not made me smart
These words of yours draw life-blood from my heart:
On that advantage, bought with such a shame,
To save a paltry life and slay bright fame,
Before young Talbot from old Talbot fly,
The coward horse that bears me fail and die!
And like me to the peasant boys of France,
To be shame's scorn and subject of mischance!
Surely, by all the glory you have won,
An if I fly, I am not Talbot's son:
Then talk no more of flight, it is no boot
If son to Talbot, die at Talbot's foot.
Then follow thou thy desperate sire of Crete,
Thou Icarus
If thou wilt fight, fight by thy father's side
And, commendable proved, let's die in pride.
Exeunt
SCENE VII. Another part of the field.
Alarum: excursions. Enter TALBOT led by a Servant
Where is my other life? mine own is gone
O, where's young Talbot? where is valiant John?
Triumphant death, smear'd with captivity,
Young Talbot's valour makes me smile at thee:
When he perceived me shrink and on my knee,
His bloody sword he brandish'd over me,
And, like a hungry lion, did commence
Rough deeds of rage and stern impatience
But when my angry guardant stood alone,
Tendering my ruin and assail'd of none,
Dizzy-eyed fury and great rage of heart
Suddenly made him from my side to start
Into the clustering battle of the French
And in that sea of blood my boy did drench
His over-mounting spirit, and there died,
My Icarus, my blossom, in his pride.
O, my dear lord, lo, where your son is borne!
Enter Soldiers, with the body of JOHN TALBOT
Thou antic death, which laugh'st us here to scorn,
Anon, from thy insulting tyranny,
Coupled in bonds of perpetuity,
Two Talbots, winged through the lither sky,
In thy despite shall 'scape mortality.
O, thou, whose wounds become hard-favour'd death,
Speak to thy father ere thou yield thy breath!
Brave death by speaking, whether he will or no
Imagine him a Frenchman and thy foe.
Poor boy! he smiles, methinks, as who should say,
Had death been French, then death had died to-day.
Come, come and lay him in his father's arms:
My spirit can no longer bear these harms.
Soldiers, adieu! I have what I would have,
Now my old arms are young John Talbot's grave.
Dies
Enter CHARLES, ALENCON, BURGUNDY, BASTARD OF ORLEANS, JOAN LA PUCELLE, and forces
Had York and Somerset brought rescue in,
We should have found a bloody day of this.
How the young whelp of Talbot's, raging-wood,
Did flesh his puny sword in Frenchmen's blood!
Once I encounter'd him, and thus I said:
'Thou maiden youth, be vanquish'd by a maid:'
But, with a proud majestical high scorn,
He answer'd thus: 'Young Talbot was not born
To be the pillage of a giglot wench:'
So, rushing in the bowels of the French,
He left me proudly, as unworthy fight.
Doubtless he would have made a noble knight
See, where he lies inhearsed in the arms
Of the most bloody nurser of his harms!
Hew them to pieces, hack their bones asunder
Whose life was England's glory, Gallia's wonder.
O, no, forbear! for that which we have fled
During the life, let us not wrong it dead.
Enter Sir William LUCY, attended
Herald, conduct me to the Dauphin's tent,
To know who hath obtained the glory of the day.
On what submissive message art thou sent?
Submission, Dauphin! 'tis a mere French word
We English warriors wot not what it means.
I come to know what prisoners thou hast ta'en
And to survey the bodies of the dead.
For prisoners ask'st thou? hell our prison is.
But tell me whom thou seek'st.
But where's the great Alcides of the field,
Valiant Lord Talbot, Earl of Shrewsbury,
Created, for his rare success in arms,
Great Earl of Washford, Waterford and Valence
Lord Talbot of Goodrig and Urchinfield,
Lord Strange of Blackmere, Lord Verdun of Alton,
Lord Cromwell of Wingfield, Lord Furnival of Sheffield,
The thrice-victorious Lord of Falconbridge
Knight of the noble order of Saint George,
Worthy Saint Michael and the Golden Fleece
Great marshal to Henry the Sixth
Of all his wars within the realm of France?
Here is a silly stately style indeed!
The Turk, that two and fifty kingdoms hath,
Writes not so tedious a style as this.
Him that thou magnifiest with all these titles
Stinking and fly-blown lies here at our feet.
Is Talbot slain, the Frenchmen's only scourge,
Your kingdom's terror and black Nemesis?
O, were mine eyeballs into bullets turn'd,
That I in rage might shoot them at your faces!
O, that I could but call these dead to life!
It were enough to fright the realm of France:
Were but his picture left amongst you here,
It would amaze the proudest of you all.
Give me their bodies, that I may bear them hence
And give them burial as beseems their worth.
I think this upstart is old Talbot's ghost,
He speaks with such a proud commanding spirit.
For God's sake let him have 'em
They would but stink, and putrefy the air.
Go, take their bodies hence.
I'll bear them hence
A phoenix that shall make all France afeard.
So we be rid of them, do with 'em what thou wilt.
And now to Paris, in this conquering vein:
All will be ours, now bloody Talbot's slain.
Exeunt
ACT V
SCENE I. London. The palace.
Sennet. Enter KING HENRY VI, GLOUCESTER, and EXETER
Have you perused the letters from the pope,
The emperor and the Earl of Armagnac?
I have, my lord: and their intent is this:
They humbly sue unto your excellence
To have a godly peace concluded of
Between the realms of England and of France.
How doth your grace affect their motion?
Well, my good lord
To stop effusion of our Christian blood
And 'stablish quietness on every side.
Ay, marry, uncle
It was both impious and unnatural
That such immanity and bloody strife
Should reign among professors of one faith.
Beside, my lord, the sooner to effect
And surer bind this knot of amity,
The Earl of Armagnac, near knit to Charles,
A man of great authority in France,
Proffers his only daughter to your grace
In marriage, with a large and sumptuous dowry.
Marriage, uncle! alas, my years are young!
And fitter is my study and my books
Than wanton dalliance with a paramour.
Yet call the ambassador
So let them have their answers every one:
I shall be well content with any choice
Tends to God's glory and my country's weal.
Enter CARDINAL OF WINCHESTER in Cardinal's habit, a Legate and two Ambassadors
What! is my Lord of Winchester install'd,
And call'd unto a cardinal's degree?
Then I perceive that will be verified
Henry the Fifth did sometime prophesy,
'If once he come to be a cardinal,
He'll make his cap co-equal with the crown.'
My lords ambassadors, your several suits
Have been consider'd and debated on.
And therefore are we certainly resolved
To draw conditions of a friendly peace
Which by my Lord of Winchester we mean
Shall be transported presently to France.
And for the proffer of my lord your master,
I have inform'd his highness so at large
As liking of the lady's virtuous gifts,
Her beauty and the value of her dower,
He doth intend she shall be England's queen.
In argument and proof of which contract,
Bear her this jewel, pledge of my affection.
And so, my lord protector, see them guarded
And safely brought to Dover
Commit them to the fortune of the sea.
Exeunt all but CARDINAL OF WINCHESTER and Legate
CARDINAL
Stay, my lord legate: you shall first receive
The sum of money which I promised
Should be deliver'd to his holiness
For clothing me in these grave ornaments.
I will attend upon your lordship's leisure.
CARDINAL
[Aside]  Now Winchester will not submit, I trow,
Or be inferior to the proudest peer.
Humphrey of Gloucester, thou shalt well perceive
That, neither in birth or for authority,
The bishop will be overborne by thee:
I'll either make thee stoop and bend thy knee,
Or sack this country with a mutiny.
Exeunt
SCENE II. France. Plains in Anjou.
Enter CHARLES, BURGUNDY, ALENCON, BASTARD OF ORLEANS, REIGNIER, JOAN LA PUCELLE, and forces
These news, my lord, may cheer our drooping spirits:
'Tis said the stout Parisians do revolt
And turn again unto the warlike French.
Then march to Paris, royal Charles of France,
And keep not back your powers in dalliance.
Peace be amongst them, if they turn to us
Else, ruin combat with their palaces!
Enter Scout
Success unto our valiant general,
And happiness to his accomplices!
What tidings send our scouts? I prithee, speak.
The English army, that divided was
Into two parties, is now conjoined in one,
And means to give you battle presently.
Somewhat too sudden, sirs, the warning is
But we will presently provide for them.
I trust the ghost of Talbot is not there:
Now he is gone, my lord, you need not fear.
Of all base passions, fear is most accursed.
Command the conquest, Charles, it shall be thine,
Let Henry fret and all the world repine.
Then on, my lords
Exeunt
SCENE III. Before Angiers.
Alarum. Excursions. Enter JOAN LA PUCELLE
The regent conquers, and the Frenchmen fly.
Now help, ye charming spells and periapts
And ye choice spirits that admonish me
And give me signs of future accidents.
Thunder
You speedy helpers, that are substitutes
Under the lordly monarch of the north,
Appear and aid me in this enterprise.
Enter Fiends
This speedy and quick appearance argues proof
Of your accustom'd diligence to me.
Now, ye familiar spirits, that are cull'd
Out of the powerful regions under earth,
Help me this once, that France may get the field.
They walk, and speak not
O, hold me not with silence over-long!
Where I was wont to feed you with my blood,
I'll lop a member off and give it you
In earnest of further benefit,
So you do condescend to help me now.
They hang their heads
No hope to have redress? My body shall
Pay recompense, if you will grant my suit.
They shake their heads
Cannot my body nor blood-sacrifice
Entreat you to your wonted furtherance?
Then take my soul, my body, soul and all,
Before that England give the French the foil.
They depart
See, they forsake me! Now the time is come
That France must vail her lofty-plumed crest
And let her head fall into England's lap.
My ancient incantations are too weak,
And hell too strong for me to buckle with:
Now, France, thy glory droopeth to the dust.
Exit
Excursions. Re-enter JOAN LA PUCELLE fighting hand  to hand with YORK. JOAN LA PUCELLE is taken. The French fly.
Damsel of France, I think I have you fast:
Unchain your spirits now with spelling charms
And try if they can gain your liberty.
A goodly prize, fit for the devil's grace!
See, how the ugly wench doth bend her brows,
As if with Circe she would change my shape!
Changed to a worser shape thou canst not be.
O, Charles the Dauphin is a proper man
No shape but his can please your dainty eye.
A plaguing mischief light on Charles and thee!
And may ye both be suddenly surprised
By bloody hands, in sleeping on your beds!
Fell banning hag, enchantress, hold thy tongue!
I prithee, give me leave to curse awhile.
Curse, miscreant, when thou comest to the stake.
Exeunt
Alarum. Enter SUFFOLK with MARGARET in his hand
Be what thou wilt, thou art my prisoner.
Gazes on her
O fairest beauty, do not fear nor fly!
For I will touch thee but with reverent hands
I kiss these fingers for eternal peace,
And lay them gently on thy tender side.
Who art thou? say, that I may honour thee.
Margaret my name, and daughter to a king,
The King of Naples, whosoe'er thou art.
An earl I am, and Suffolk am I call'd.
Be not offended, nature's miracle,
Thou art allotted to be ta'en by me:
So doth the swan her downy cygnets save,
Keeping them prisoner underneath her wings.
Yet, if this servile usage once offend.
Go, and be free again, as Suffolk's friend.
She is going
O, stay! I have no power to let her pass
My hand would free her, but my heart says no
As plays the sun upon the glassy streams,
Twinkling another counterfeited beam,
So seems this gorgeous beauty to mine eyes.
Fain would I woo her, yet I dare not speak:
I'll call for pen and ink, and write my mind.
Fie, de la Pole! disable not thyself
Hast not a tongue? is she not here?
Wilt thou be daunted at a woman's sight?
Ay, beauty's princely majesty is such,
Confounds the tongue and makes the senses rough.
Say, Earl of Suffolk--if thy name be so--
What ransom must I pay before I pass?
For I perceive I am thy prisoner.
How canst thou tell she will deny thy suit,
Before thou make a trial of her love?
Why speak'st thou not? what ransom must I pay?
She's beautiful, and therefore to be woo'd
She is a woman, therefore to be won.
Wilt thou accept of ransom? yea, or no.
Fond man, remember that thou hast a wife
Then how can Margaret be thy paramour?
I were best to leave him, for he will not hear.
There all is marr'd
He talks at random
And yet a dispensation may be had.
And yet I would that you would answer me.
I'll win this Lady Margaret. For whom?
Why, for my king: tush, that's a wooden thing!
He talks of wood: it is some carpenter.
Yet so my fancy may be satisfied,
And peace established between these realms
But there remains a scruple in that too
For though her father be the King of Naples,
Duke of Anjou and Maine, yet is he poor,
And our nobility will scorn the match.
Hear ye, captain, are you not at leisure?
It shall be so, disdain they ne'er so much.
Henry is youthful and will quickly yield.
Madam, I have a secret to reveal.
What though I be enthrall'd? he seems a knight,
And will not any way dishonour me.
Lady, vouchsafe to listen what I say.
Perhaps I shall be rescued by the French
And then I need not crave his courtesy.
Sweet madam, give me a hearing in a cause--
Tush, women have been captivate ere now.
Lady, wherefore talk you so?
I cry you mercy, 'tis but Quid for Quo.
Say, gentle princess, would you not suppose
Your bondage happy, to be made a queen?
To be a queen in bondage is more vile
Than is a slave in base servility
For princes should be free.
And so shall you,
If happy England's royal king be free.
Why, what concerns his freedom unto me?
I'll undertake to make thee Henry's queen,
To put a golden sceptre in thy hand
And set a precious crown upon thy head,
If thou wilt condescend to be my--
What?
His love.
I am unworthy to be Henry's wife.
No, gentle madam
To woo so fair a dame to be his wife,
And have no portion in the choice myself.
How say you, madam, are ye so content?
An if my father please, I am content.
Then call our captains and our colours forth.
And, madam, at your father's castle walls
We'll crave a parley, to confer with him.
A parley sounded. Enter REIGNIER on the walls
See, Reignier, see, thy daughter prisoner!
To whom?
To me.
Suffolk, what remedy?
I am a soldier, and unapt to weep,
Or to exclaim on fortune's fickleness.
Yes, there is remedy enough, my lord:
Consent, and for thy honour give consent,
Thy daughter shall be wedded to my king
Whom I with pain have woo'd and won thereto
And this her easy-held imprisonment
Hath gained thy daughter princely liberty.
Speaks Suffolk as he thinks?
Fair Margaret knows
That Suffolk doth not flatter, face, or feign.
Upon thy princely warrant, I descend
To give thee answer of thy just demand.
Exit from the walls
And here I will expect thy coming.
Trumpets sound. Enter REIGNIER, below
Welcome, brave earl, into our territories:
Command in Anjou what your honour pleases.
Thanks, Reignier, happy for so sweet a child,
Fit to be made companion with a king:
What answer makes your grace unto my suit?
Since thou dost deign to woo her little worth
To be the princely bride of such a lord
Upon condition I may quietly
Enjoy mine own, the country Maine and Anjou,
Free from oppression or the stroke of war,
My daughter shall be Henry's, if he please.
That is her ransom
And those two counties I will undertake
Your grace shall well and quietly enjoy.
And I again, in Henry's royal name,
As deputy unto that gracious king,
Give thee her hand, for sign of plighted faith.
Reignier of France, I give thee kingly thanks,
Because this is in traffic of a king.
Aside
And yet, methinks, I could be well content
To be mine own attorney in this case.
I'll over then to England with this news,
And make this marriage to be solemnized.
So farewell, Reignier: set this diamond safe
In golden palaces, as it becomes.
I do embrace thee, as I would embrace
The Christian prince, King Henry, were he here.
Farewell, my lord: good wishes, praise and prayers
Shall Suffolk ever have of Margaret.
Going
Farewell, sweet madam: but hark you, Margaret
No princely commendations to my king?
Such commendations as becomes a maid,
A virgin and his servant, say to him.
Words sweetly placed and modestly directed.
But madam, I must trouble you again
No loving token to his majesty?
Yes, my good lord, a pure unspotted heart,
Never yet taint with love, I send the king.
And this withal.
Kisses her
That for thyself: I will not so presume
To send such peevish tokens to a king.
Exeunt REIGNIER and MARGARET
O, wert thou for myself! But, Suffolk, stay
Thou mayst not wander in that labyrinth
There Minotaurs and ugly treasons lurk.
Solicit Henry with her wondrous praise:
Bethink thee on her virtues that surmount,
And natural graces that extinguish art
Repeat their semblance often on the seas,
That, when thou comest to kneel at Henry's feet,
Thou mayst bereave him of his wits with wonder.
Exit
SCENE IV. Camp of the YORK in Anjou.
Enter YORK, WARWICK, and others
Bring forth that sorceress condemn'd to burn.
Enter JOAN LA PUCELLE, guarded, and a Shepherd
Ah, Joan, this kills thy father's heart outright!
Have I sought every country far and near,
And, now it is my chance to find thee out,
Must I behold thy timeless cruel death?
Ah, Joan, sweet daughter Joan, I'll die with thee!
Decrepit miser! base ignoble wretch!
I am descended of a gentler blood:
Thou art no father nor no friend of mine.
Out, out! My lords, an please you, 'tis not so
I did beget her, all the parish knows:
Her mother liveth yet, can testify
She was the first fruit of my bachelorship.
Graceless! wilt thou deny thy parentage?
This argues what her kind of life hath been,
Wicked and vile
Fie, Joan, that thou wilt be so obstacle!
God knows thou art a collop of my flesh
And for thy sake have I shed many a tear:
Deny me not, I prithee, gentle Joan.
Peasant, avaunt! You have suborn'd this man,
Of purpose to obscure my noble birth.
'Tis true, I gave a noble to the priest
The morn that I was wedded to her mother.
Kneel down and take my blessing, good my girl.
Wilt thou not stoop? Now cursed be the time
Of thy nativity! I would the milk
Thy mother gave thee when thou suck'dst her breast,
Had been a little ratsbane for thy sake!
Or else, when thou didst keep my lambs a-field,
I wish some ravenous wolf had eaten thee!
Dost thou deny thy father, cursed drab?
O, burn her, burn her! hanging is too good.
Exit
Take her away
To fill the world with vicious qualities.
First, let me tell you whom you have condemn'd:
Not me begotten of a shepherd swain,
But issued from the progeny of kings
Virtuous and holy
By inspiration of celestial grace,
To work exceeding miracles on earth.
I never had to do with wicked spirits:
But you, that are polluted with your lusts,
Stain'd with the guiltless blood of innocents,
Corrupt and tainted with a thousand vices,
Because you want the grace that others have,
You judge it straight a thing impossible
To compass wonders but by help of devils.
No, misconceived! Joan of Arc hath been
A virgin from her tender infancy,
Chaste and immaculate in very thought
Whose maiden blood, thus rigorously effused,
Will cry for vengeance at the gates of heaven.
Ay, ay: away with her to execution!
And hark ye, sirs
Spare for no faggots, let there be enow:
Place barrels of pitch upon the fatal stake,
That so her torture may be shortened.
Will nothing turn your unrelenting hearts?
Then, Joan, discover thine infirmity,
That warranteth by law to be thy privilege.
I am with child, ye bloody homicides:
Murder not then the fruit within my womb,
Although ye hale me to a violent death.
Now heaven forfend! the holy maid with child!
The greatest miracle that e'er ye wrought:
Is all your strict preciseness come to this?
She and the Dauphin have been juggling:
I did imagine what would be her refuge.
Well, go to
Especially since Charles must father it.
You are deceived
It was Alencon that enjoy'd my love.
Alencon! that notorious Machiavel!
It dies, an if it had a thousand lives.
O, give me leave, I have deluded you:
'Twas neither Charles nor yet the duke I named,
But Reignier, king of Naples, that prevail'd.
A married man! that's most intolerable.
Why, here's a girl! I think she knows not well,
There were so many, whom she may accuse.
It's sign she hath been liberal and free.
And yet, forsooth, she is a virgin pure.
Strumpet, thy words condemn thy brat and thee:
Use no entreaty, for it is in vain.
Then lead me hence
May never glorious sun reflex his beams
Upon the country where you make abode
But darkness and the gloomy shade of death
Environ you, till mischief and despair
Drive you to break your necks or hang yourselves!
Exit, guarded
Break thou in pieces and consume to ashes,
Thou foul accursed minister of hell!
Enter CARDINAL OF WINCHESTER, attended
CARDINAL
Lord regent, I do greet your excellence
With letters of commission from the king.
For know, my lords, the states of Christendom,
Moved with remorse of these outrageous broils,
Have earnestly implored a general peace
Betwixt our nation and the aspiring French
And here at hand the Dauphin and his train
Approacheth, to confer about some matter.
Is all our travail turn'd to this effect?
After the slaughter of so many peers,
So many captains, gentlemen and soldiers,
That in this quarrel have been overthrown
And sold their bodies for their country's benefit,
Shall we at last conclude effeminate peace?
Have we not lost most part of all the towns,
By treason, falsehood and by treachery,
Our great progenitors had conquered?
O Warwick, Warwick! I foresee with grief
The utter loss of all the realm of France.
Be patient, York: if we conclude a peace,
It shall be with such strict and severe covenants
As little shall the Frenchmen gain thereby.
Enter CHARLES, ALENCON, BASTARD OF ORLEANS, REIGNIER, and others
Since, lords of England, it is thus agreed
That peaceful truce shall be proclaim'd in France,
We come to be informed by yourselves
What the conditions of that league must be.
Speak, Winchester
The hollow passage of my poison'd voice,
By sight of these our baleful enemies.
CARDINAL
Charles, and the rest, it is enacted thus:
That, in regard King Henry gives consent,
Of mere compassion and of lenity,
To ease your country of distressful war,
And suffer you to breathe in fruitful peace,
You shall become true liegemen to his crown:
And Charles, upon condition thou wilt swear
To pay him tribute, submit thyself,
Thou shalt be placed as viceroy under him,
And still enjoy thy regal dignity.
Must he be then as shadow of himself?
Adorn his temples with a coronet,
And yet, in substance and authority,
Retain but privilege of a private man?
This proffer is absurd and reasonless.
'Tis known already that I am possess'd
With more than half the Gallian territories,
And therein reverenced for their lawful king:
Shall I, for lucre of the rest unvanquish'd,
Detract so much from that prerogative,
As to be call'd but viceroy of the whole?
No, lord ambassador, I'll rather keep
That which I have than, coveting for more,
Be cast from possibility of all.
Insulting Charles! hast thou by secret means
Used intercession to obtain a league,
And, now the matter grows to compromise,
Stand'st thou aloof upon comparison?
Either accept the title thou usurp'st,
Of benefit proceeding from our king
And not of any challenge of desert,
Or we will plague thee with incessant wars.
My lord, you do not well in obstinacy
To cavil in the course of this contract:
If once it be neglected, ten to one
We shall not find like opportunity.
To say the truth, it is your policy
To save your subjects from such massacre
And ruthless slaughters as are daily seen
By our proceeding in hostility
And therefore take this compact of a truce,
Although you break it when your pleasure serves.
How say'st thou, Charles? shall our condition stand?
It shall
Only reserved, you claim no interest
In any of our towns of garrison.
Then swear allegiance to his majesty,
As thou art knight, never to disobey
Nor be rebellious to the crown of England,
Thou, nor thy nobles, to the crown of England.
So, now dismiss your army when ye please:
Hang up your ensign, let your drums be still,
For here we entertain a solemn peace.
Exeunt
SCENE V. London. The palace.
Enter SUFFOLK in conference with KING HENRY VI, GLOUCESTER and EXETER
Your wondrous rare description, noble earl,
Of beauteous Margaret hath astonish'd me:
Her virtues graced with external gifts
Do breed love's settled passions in my heart:
And like as rigor of tempestuous gusts
Provokes the mightiest hulk against the tide,
So am I driven by breath of her renown
Either to suffer shipwreck or arrive
Where I may have fruition of her love.
Tush, my good lord, this superficial tale
Is but a preface of her worthy praise
The chief perfections of that lovely dame
Had I sufficient skill to utter them,
Would make a volume of enticing lines,
Able to ravish any dull conceit:
And, which is more, she is not so divine,
So full-replete with choice of all delights,
But with as humble lowliness of mind
She is content to be at your command
Command, I mean, of virtuous chaste intents,
To love and honour Henry as her lord.
And otherwise will Henry ne'er presume.
Therefore, my lord protector, give consent
That Margaret may be England's royal queen.
So should I give consent to flatter sin.
You know, my lord, your highness is betroth'd
Unto another lady of esteem:
How shall we then dispense with that contract,
And not deface your honour with reproach?
As doth a ruler with unlawful oaths
Or one that, at a triumph having vow'd
To try his strength, forsaketh yet the lists
By reason of his adversary's odds:
A poor earl's daughter is unequal odds,
And therefore may be broke without offence.
Why, what, I pray, is Margaret more than that?
Her father is no better than an earl,
Although in glorious titles he excel.
Yes, lord, her father is a king,
The King of Naples and Jerusalem
And of such great authority in France
As his alliance will confirm our peace
And keep the Frenchmen in allegiance.
And so the Earl of Armagnac may do,
Because he is near kinsman unto Charles.
Beside, his wealth doth warrant a liberal dower,
Where Reignier sooner will receive than give.
A dower, my lords! disgrace not so your king,
That he should be so abject, base and poor,
To choose for wealth and not for perfect love.
Henry is able to enrich his queen
And not seek a queen to make him rich:
So worthless peasants bargain for their wives,
As market-men for oxen, sheep, or horse.
Marriage is a matter of more worth
Than to be dealt in by attorneyship
Not whom we will, but whom his grace affects,
Must be companion of his nuptial bed:
And therefore, lords, since he affects her most,
It most of all these reasons bindeth us,
In our opinions she should be preferr'd.
For what is wedlock forced but a hell,
An age of discord and continual strife?
Whereas the contrary bringeth bliss,
And is a pattern of celestial peace.
Whom should we match with Henry, being a king,
But Margaret, that is daughter to a king?
Her peerless feature, joined with her birth,
Approves her fit for none but for a king:
Her valiant courage and undaunted spirit,
More than in women commonly is seen,
Will answer our hope in issue of a king
For Henry, son unto a conqueror,
Is likely to beget more conquerors,
If with a lady of so high resolve
As is fair Margaret he be link'd in love.
Then yield, my lords
That Margaret shall be queen, and none but she.
Whether it be through force of your report,
My noble Lord of Suffolk, or for that
My tender youth was never yet attaint
With any passion of inflaming love,
I cannot tell
I feel such sharp dissension in my breast,
Such fierce alarums both of hope and fear,
As I am sick with working of my thoughts.
Take, therefore, shipping
Agree to any covenants, and procure
That Lady Margaret do vouchsafe to come
To cross the seas to England and be crown'd
King Henry's faithful and anointed queen:
For your expenses and sufficient charge,
Among the people gather up a tenth.
Be gone, I say
I rest perplexed with a thousand cares.
And you, good uncle, banish all offence:
If you do censure me by what you were,
Not what you are, I know it will excuse
This sudden execution of my will.
And so, conduct me where, from company,
I may revolve and ruminate my grief.
Exit
Ay, grief, I fear me, both at first and last.
Exeunt GLOUCESTER and EXETER
Thus Suffolk hath prevail'd
As did the youthful Paris once to Greece,
With hope to find the like event in love,
But prosper better than the Trojan did.
Margaret shall now be queen, and rule the king
But I will rule both her, the king and realm.
Exit
ACT I
SCENE I. London. The palace.
Flourish of trumpets: then hautboys. Enter KING  HENRY VI, GLOUCESTER, SALISBURY, WARWICK, and  CARDINAL, on the one side
As by your high imperial majesty
I had in charge at my depart for France,
As procurator to your excellence,
To marry Princess Margaret for your grace,
So, in the famous ancient city, Tours,
In presence of the Kings of France and Sicil,
The Dukes of Orleans, Calaber, Bretagne and Alencon,
Seven earls, twelve barons and twenty reverend bishops,
I have perform'd my task and was espoused:
And humbly now upon my bended knee,
In sight of England and her lordly peers,
Deliver up my title in the queen
To your most gracious hands, that are the substance
Of that great shadow I did represent
The happiest gift that ever marquess gave,
The fairest queen that ever king received.
Suffolk, arise. Welcome, Queen Margaret:
I can express no kinder sign of love
Than this kind kiss. O Lord, that lends me life,
Lend me a heart replete with thankfulness!
For thou hast given me in this beauteous face
A world of earthly blessings to my soul,
If sympathy of love unite our thoughts.
Great King of England and my gracious lord,
The mutual conference that my mind hath had,
By day, by night, waking and in my dreams,
In courtly company or at my beads,
With you, mine alder-liefest sovereign,
Makes me the bolder to salute my king
With ruder terms, such as my wit affords
And over-joy of heart doth minister.
Her sight did ravish
Her words y-clad with wisdom's majesty,
Makes me from wondering fall to weeping joys
Such is the fulness of my heart's content.
Lords, with one cheerful voice welcome my love.
[Kneeling]  Long live Queen Margaret, England's
happiness!
We thank you all.
Flourish
My lord protector, so it please your grace,
Here are the articles of contracted peace
Between our sovereign and the French king Charles,
For eighteen months concluded by consent.
[Reads]  'Imprimis, it is agreed between the French
king Charles, and William de la Pole, Marquess of
Suffolk, ambassador for Henry King of England, that
the said Henry shall espouse the Lady Margaret,
daughter unto Reignier King of Naples, Sicilia and
Jerusalem, and crown her Queen of England ere the
thirtieth of May next ensuing. Item, that the duchy
of Anjou and the county of Maine shall be released
and delivered to the king her father'--
Lets the paper fall
Uncle, how now!
Pardon me, gracious lord
Some sudden qualm hath struck me at the heart
And dimm'd mine eyes, that I can read no further.
Uncle of Winchester, I pray, read on.
[Reads]  'Item, It is further agreed between them,
that the duchies of Anjou and Maine shall be
released and delivered over to the king her father,
and she sent over of the King of England's own
proper cost and charges, without having any dowry.'
They please us well. Lord marquess, kneel down:
We here create thee the first duke of Suffolk,
And gird thee with the sword. Cousin of York,
We here discharge your grace from being regent
I' the parts of France, till term of eighteen months
Be full expired. Thanks, uncle Winchester,
Gloucester, York, Buckingham, Somerset,
Salisbury, and Warwick
We thank you all for the great favour done,
In entertainment to my princely queen.
Come, let us in, and with all speed provide
To see her coronation be perform'd.
Exeunt KING HENRY VI, QUEEN MARGARET, and SUFFOLK
Brave peers of England, pillars of the state,
To you Duke Humphrey must unload his grief,
Your grief, the common grief of all the land.
What! did my brother Henry spend his youth,
His valour, coin and people, in the wars?
Did he so often lodge in open field,
In winter's cold and summer's parching heat,
To conquer France, his true inheritance?
And did my brother Bedford toil his wits,
To keep by policy what Henry got?
Have you yourselves, Somerset, Buckingham,
Brave York, Salisbury, and victorious Warwick,
Received deep scars in France and Normandy?
Or hath mine uncle Beaufort and myself,
With all the learned council of the realm,
Studied so long, sat in the council-house
Early and late, debating to and fro
How France and Frenchmen might be kept in awe,
And had his highness in his infancy
Crowned in Paris in despite of foes?
And shall these labours and these honours die?
Shall Henry's conquest, Bedford's vigilance,
Your deeds of war and all our counsel die?
O peers of England, shameful is this league!
Fatal this marriage, cancelling your fame,
Blotting your names from books of memory,
Razing the characters of your renown,
Defacing monuments of conquer'd France,
Undoing all, as all had never been!
Nephew, what means this passionate discourse,
This peroration with such circumstance?
For France, 'tis ours
Ay, uncle, we will keep it, if we can
But now it is impossible we should:
Suffolk, the new-made duke that rules the roast,
Hath given the duchy of Anjou and Maine
Unto the poor King Reignier, whose large style
Agrees not with the leanness of his purse.
Now, by the death of Him that died for all,
These counties were the keys of Normandy.
But wherefore weeps Warwick, my valiant son?
For grief that they are past recovery:
For, were there hope to conquer them again,
My sword should shed hot blood, mine eyes no tears.
Anjou and Maine! myself did win them both
Those provinces these arms of mine did conquer:
And are the cities, that I got with wounds,
Delivered up again with peaceful words?
Mort Dieu!
For Suffolk's duke, may he be suffocate,
That dims the honour of this warlike isle!
France should have torn and rent my very heart,
Before I would have yielded to this league.
I never read but England's kings have had
Large sums of gold and dowries with their wives:
And our King Henry gives away his own,
To match with her that brings no vantages.
A proper jest, and never heard before,
That Suffolk should demand a whole fifteenth
For costs and charges in transporting her!
She should have stayed in France and starved
in France, Before--
My Lord of Gloucester, now ye grow too hot:
It was the pleasure of my lord the King.
My Lord of Winchester, I know your mind
'Tis not my speeches that you do mislike,
But 'tis my presence that doth trouble ye.
Rancour will out: proud prelate, in thy face
I see thy fury: if I longer stay,
We shall begin our ancient bickerings.
Lordings, farewell
I prophesied France will be lost ere long.
Exit
So, there goes our protector in a rage.
'Tis known to you he is mine enemy,
Nay, more, an enemy unto you all,
And no great friend, I fear me, to the king.
Consider, lords, he is the next of blood,
And heir apparent to the English crown:
Had Henry got an empire by his marriage,
And all the wealthy kingdoms of the west,
There's reason he should be displeased at it.
Look to it, lords! let not his smoothing words
Bewitch your hearts
What though the common people favour him,
Calling him 'Humphrey, the good Duke of
Gloucester,'
Clapping their hands, and crying with loud voice,
'Jesu maintain your royal excellence!'
With 'God preserve the good Duke Humphrey!'
I fear me, lords, for all this flattering gloss,
He will be found a dangerous protector.
Why should he, then, protect our sovereign,
He being of age to govern of himself?
Cousin of Somerset, join you with me,
And all together, with the Duke of Suffolk,
We'll quickly hoise Duke Humphrey from his seat.
This weighty business will not brook delay:
I'll to the Duke of Suffolk presently.
Exit
Cousin of Buckingham, though Humphrey's pride
And greatness of his place be grief to us,
Yet let us watch the haughty cardinal:
His insolence is more intolerable
Than all the princes in the land beside:
If Gloucester be displaced, he'll be protector.
Or thou or I, Somerset, will be protector,
Despite Duke Humphrey or the cardinal.
Exeunt BUCKINGHAM and SOMERSET
Pride went before, ambition follows him.
While these do labour for their own preferment,
Behoves it us to labour for the realm.
I never saw but Humphrey Duke of Gloucester
Did bear him like a noble gentleman.
Oft have I seen the haughty cardinal,
More like a soldier than a man o' the church,
As stout and proud as he were lord of all,
Swear like a ruffian and demean himself
Unlike the ruler of a commonweal.
Warwick, my son, the comfort of my age,
Thy deeds, thy plainness and thy housekeeping,
Hath won the greatest favour of the commons,
Excepting none but good Duke Humphrey:
And, brother York, thy acts in Ireland,
In bringing them to civil discipline,
Thy late exploits done in the heart of France,
When thou wert regent for our sovereign,
Have made thee fear'd and honour'd of the people:
Join we together, for the public good,
In what we can, to bridle and suppress
The pride of Suffolk and the cardinal,
With Somerset's and Buckingham's ambition
And, as we may, cherish Duke Humphrey's deeds,
While they do tend the profit of the land.
So God help Warwick, as he loves the land,
And common profit of his country!
[Aside]  And so says York, for he hath greatest cause.
Then let's make haste away, and look unto the main.
Unto the main! O father, Maine is lost
That Maine which by main force Warwick did win,
And would have kept so long as breath did last!
Main chance, father, you meant
Which I will win from France, or else be slain,
Exeunt WARWICK and SALISBURY
Anjou and Maine are given to the French
Paris is lost
Stands on a tickle point, now they are gone:
Suffolk concluded on the articles,
The peers agreed, and Henry was well pleased
To change two dukedoms for a duke's fair daughter.
I cannot blame them all: what is't to them?
'Tis thine they give away, and not their own.
Pirates may make cheap pennyworths of their pillage
And purchase friends and give to courtezans,
Still revelling like lords till all be gone
While as the silly owner of the goods
Weeps over them and wrings his hapless hands
And shakes his head and trembling stands aloof,
While all is shared and all is borne away,
Ready to starve and dare not touch his own:
So York must sit and fret and bite his tongue,
While his own lands are bargain'd for and sold.
Methinks the realms of England, France and Ireland
Bear that proportion to my flesh and blood
As did the fatal brand Althaea burn'd
Unto the prince's heart of Calydon.
Anjou and Maine both given unto the French!
Cold news for me, for I had hope of France,
Even as I have of fertile England's soil.
A day will come when York shall claim his own
And therefore I will take the Nevils' parts
And make a show of love to proud Duke Humphrey,
And, when I spy advantage, claim the crown,
For that's the golden mark I seek to hit:
Nor shall proud Lancaster usurp my right,
Nor hold the sceptre in his childish fist,
Nor wear the diadem upon his head,
Whose church-like humours fits not for a crown.
Then, York, be still awhile, till time do serve:
Watch thou and wake when others be asleep,
To pry into the secrets of the state
Till Henry, surfeiting in joys of love,
With his new bride and England's dear-bought queen,
And Humphrey with the peers be fall'n at jars:
Then will I raise aloft the milk-white rose,
With whose sweet smell the air shall be perfumed
And in my standard bear the arms of York
To grapple with the house of Lancaster
And, force perforce, I'll make him yield the crown,
Whose bookish rule hath pull'd fair England down.
Exit
SCENE II. GLOUCESTER'S house.
Enter GLOUCESTER and his DUCHESS
Why droops my lord, like over-ripen'd corn,
Hanging the head at Ceres' plenteous load?
Why doth the great Duke Humphrey knit his brows,
As frowning at the favours of the world?
Why are thine eyes fixed to the sullen earth,
Gazing on that which seems to dim thy sight?
What seest thou there? King Henry's diadem,
Enchased with all the honours of the world?
If so, gaze on, and grovel on thy face,
Until thy head be circled with the same.
Put forth thy hand, reach at the glorious gold.
What, is't too short? I'll lengthen it with mine:
And, having both together heaved it up,
We'll both together lift our heads to heaven,
And never more abase our sight so low
As to vouchsafe one glance unto the ground.
O Nell, sweet Nell, if thou dost love thy lord,
Banish the canker of ambitious thoughts.
And may that thought, when I imagine ill
Against my king and nephew, virtuous Henry,
Be my last breathing in this mortal world!
My troublous dream this night doth make me sad.
What dream'd my lord? tell me, and I'll requite it
With sweet rehearsal of my morning's dream.
Methought this staff, mine office-badge in court,
Was broke in twain
But, as I think, it was by the cardinal
And on the pieces of the broken wand
Were placed the heads of Edmund Duke of Somerset,
And William de la Pole, first duke of Suffolk.
This was my dream: what it doth bode, God knows.
Tut, this was nothing but an argument
That he that breaks a stick of Gloucester's grove
Shall lose his head for his presumption.
But list to me, my Humphrey, my sweet duke:
Methought I sat in seat of majesty
In the cathedral church of Westminster,
And in that chair where kings and queens are crown'd
Where Henry and dame Margaret kneel'd to me
And on my head did set the diadem.
Nay, Eleanor, then must I chide outright:
Presumptuous dame, ill-nurtured Eleanor,
Art thou not second woman in the realm,
And the protector's wife, beloved of him?
Hast thou not worldly pleasure at command,
Above the reach or compass of thy thought?
And wilt thou still be hammering treachery,
To tumble down thy husband and thyself
From top of honour to disgrace's feet?
Away from me, and let me hear no more!
What, what, my lord! are you so choleric
With Eleanor, for telling but her dream?
Next time I'll keep my dreams unto myself,
And not be cheque'd.
Nay, be not angry
Enter Messenger
My lord protector, 'tis his highness' pleasure
You do prepare to ride unto Saint Alban's,
Where as the king and queen do mean to hawk.
I go. Come, Nell, thou wilt ride with us?
Yes, my good lord, I'll follow presently.
Exeunt GLOUCESTER and Messenger
Follow I must
While Gloucester bears this base and humble mind.
Were I a man, a duke, and next of blood,
I would remove these tedious stumbling-blocks
And smooth my way upon their headless necks
And, being a woman, I will not be slack
To play my part in Fortune's pageant.
Where are you there? Sir John! nay, fear not, man,
We are alone
Enter HUME
Jesus preserve your royal majesty!
What say'st thou? majesty! I am but grace.
But, by the grace of God, and Hume's advice,
Your grace's title shall be multiplied.
What say'st thou, man? hast thou as yet conferr'd
With Margery Jourdain, the cunning witch,
With Roger Bolingbroke, the conjurer?
And will they undertake to do me good?
This they have promised, to show your highness
A spirit raised from depth of under-ground,
That shall make answer to such questions
As by your grace shall be propounded him.
It is enough
When from St. Alban's we do make return,
We'll see these things effected to the full.
Here, Hume, take this reward
With thy confederates in this weighty cause.
Exit
Hume must make merry with the duchess' gold
Marry, and shall. But how now, Sir John Hume!
Seal up your lips, and give no words but mum:
The business asketh silent secrecy.
Dame Eleanor gives gold to bring the witch:
Gold cannot come amiss, were she a devil.
Yet have I gold flies from another coast
I dare not say, from the rich cardinal
And from the great and new-made Duke of Suffolk,
Yet I do find it so
They, knowing Dame Eleanor's aspiring humour,
Have hired me to undermine the duchess
And buz these conjurations in her brain.
They say 'A crafty knave does need no broker
Yet am I Suffolk and the cardinal's broker.
Hume, if you take not heed, you shall go near
To call them both a pair of crafty knaves.
Well, so it stands
Hume's knavery will be the duchess' wreck,
And her attainture will be Humphrey's fall:
Sort how it will, I shall have gold for all.
Exit
SCENE III. The palace.
Enter three or four Petitioners, PETER, the Armourer's man, being one
My masters, let's stand close: my lord protector
will come this way by and by, and then we may deliver
our supplications in the quill.
Marry, the Lord protect him, for he's a good man!
Jesu bless him!
Enter SUFFOLK and QUEEN MARGARET
Here a' comes, methinks, and the queen with him.
I'll be the first, sure.
Come back, fool
not my lord protector.
How now, fellow! would'st anything with me?
I pray, my lord, pardon me
protector.
[Reading]  'To my Lord Protector!' Are your
supplications to his lordship? Let me see them:
what is thine?
Mine is, an't please your grace, against John
Goodman, my lord cardinal's man, for keeping my
house, and lands, and wife and all, from me.
Thy wife, too! that's some wrong, indeed. What's
yours? What's here!
Reads
'Against the Duke of Suffolk, for enclosing the
commons of Melford.' How now, sir knave!
Alas, sir, I am but a poor petitioner of our whole township.
[Giving his petition]  Against my master, Thomas
Horner, for saying that the Duke of York was rightful
heir to the crown.
What sayst thou? did the Duke of York say he was
rightful heir to the crown?
That my master was? no, forsooth: my master said
that he was, and that the king was an usurper.
Who is there?
Enter Servant
Take this fellow in, and send for
his master with a pursuivant presently: we'll hear
more of your matter before the King.
Exit Servant with PETER
And as for you, that love to be protected
Under the wings of our protector's grace,
Begin your suits anew, and sue to him.
Tears the supplication
Away, base cullions! Suffolk, let them go.
Come, let's be gone.
Exeunt
My Lord of Suffolk, say, is this the guise,
Is this the fashion in the court of England?
Is this the government of Britain's isle,
And this the royalty of Albion's king?
What shall King Henry be a pupil still
Under the surly Gloucester's governance?
Am I a queen in title and in style,
And must be made a subject to a duke?
I tell thee, Pole, when in the city Tours
Thou ran'st a tilt in honour of my love
And stolest away the ladies' hearts of France,
I thought King Henry had resembled thee
In courage, courtship and proportion:
But all his mind is bent to holiness,
To number Ave-Maries on his beads
His champions are the prophets and apostles,
His weapons holy saws of sacred writ,
His study is his tilt-yard, and his loves
Are brazen images of canonized saints.
I would the college of the cardinals
Would choose him pope, and carry him to Rome,
And set the triple crown upon his head:
That were a state fit for his holiness.
Madam, be patient: as I was cause
Your highness came to England, so will I
In England work your grace's full content.
Beside the haughty protector, have we Beaufort,
The imperious churchman, Somerset, Buckingham,
And grumbling York: and not the least of these
But can do more in England than the king.
And he of these that can do most of all
Cannot do more in England than the Nevils:
Salisbury and Warwick are no simple peers.
Not all these lords do vex me half so much
As that proud dame, the lord protector's wife.
She sweeps it through the court with troops of ladies,
More like an empress than Duke Humphrey's wife:
Strangers in court do take her for the queen:
She bears a duke's revenues on her back,
And in her heart she scorns our poverty:
Shall I not live to be avenged on her?
Contemptuous base-born callet as she is,
She vaunted 'mongst her minions t'other day,
The very train of her worst wearing gown
Was better worth than all my father's lands,
Till Suffolk gave two dukedoms for his daughter.
Madam, myself have limed a bush for her,
And placed a quire of such enticing birds,
That she will light to listen to the lays,
And never mount to trouble you again.
So, let her rest: and, madam, list to me
For I am bold to counsel you in this.
Although we fancy not the cardinal,
Yet must we join with him and with the lords,
Till we have brought Duke Humphrey in disgrace.
As for the Duke of York, this late complaint
Will make but little for his benefit.
So, one by one, we'll weed them all at last,
And you yourself shall steer the happy helm.
Sound a sennet. Enter KING HENRY VI, GLOUCESTER,  CARDINAL, BUCKINGHAM, YORK, SOMERSET, SALISBURY, WARWICK, and the DUCHESS
For my part, noble lords, I care not which
Or Somerset or York, all's one to me.
If York have ill demean'd himself in France,
Then let him be denay'd the regentship.
If Somerset be unworthy of the place,
Let York be regent
Whether your grace be worthy, yea or no,
Dispute not that: York is the worthier.
Ambitious Warwick, let thy betters speak.
The cardinal's not my better in the field.
All in this presence are thy betters, Warwick.
Warwick may live to be the best of all.
Peace, son! and show some reason, Buckingham,
Why Somerset should be preferred in this.
Because the king, forsooth, will have it so.
Madam, the king is old enough himself
To give his censure: these are no women's matters.
If he be old enough, what needs your grace
To be protector of his excellence?
Madam, I am protector of the realm
And, at his pleasure, will resign my place.
Resign it then and leave thine insolence.
Since thou wert king--as who is king but thou?--
The commonwealth hath daily run to wreck
The Dauphin hath prevail'd beyond the seas
And all the peers and nobles of the realm
Have been as bondmen to thy sovereignty.
The commons hast thou rack'd
Are lank and lean with thy extortions.
Thy sumptuous buildings and thy wife's attire
Have cost a mass of public treasury.
Thy cruelty in execution
Upon offenders, hath exceeded law,
And left thee to the mercy of the law.
They sale of offices and towns in France,
If they were known, as the suspect is great,
Would make thee quickly hop without thy head.
Exit GLOUCESTER. QUEEN MARGARET drops her fan
Give me my fan: what, minion! can ye not?
She gives the DUCHESS a box on the ear
I cry you mercy, madam
Was't I! yea, I it was, proud Frenchwoman:
Could I come near your beauty with my nails,
I'd set my ten commandments in your face.
Sweet aunt, be quiet
Against her will! good king, look to't in time
She'll hamper thee, and dandle thee like a baby:
Though in this place most master wear no breeches,
She shall not strike Dame Eleanor unrevenged.
Exit
Lord cardinal, I will follow Eleanor,
And listen after Humphrey, how he proceeds:
She's tickled now
She'll gallop far enough to her destruction.
Exit
Re-enter GLOUCESTER
Now, lords, my choler being over-blown
With walking once about the quadrangle,
I come to talk of commonwealth affairs.
As for your spiteful false objections,
Prove them, and I lie open to the law:
But God in mercy so deal with my soul,
As I in duty love my king and country!
But, to the matter that we have in hand:
I say, my sovereign, York is meetest man
To be your regent in the realm of France.
Before we make election, give me leave
To show some reason, of no little force,
That York is most unmeet of any man.
I'll tell thee, Suffolk, why I am unmeet:
First, for I cannot flatter thee in pride
Next, if I be appointed for the place,
My Lord of Somerset will keep me here,
Without discharge, money, or furniture,
Till France be won into the Dauphin's hands:
Last time, I danced attendance on his will
Till Paris was besieged, famish'd, and lost.
That can I witness
Did never traitor in the land commit.
Peace, headstrong Warwick!
Image of pride, why should I hold my peace?
Enter HORNER, the Armourer, and his man PETER, guarded
Because here is a man accused of treason:
Pray God the Duke of York excuse himself!
Doth any one accuse York for a traitor?
What mean'st thou, Suffolk
Please it your majesty, this is the man
That doth accuse his master of high treason:
His words were these: that Richard, Duke of York,
Was rightful heir unto the English crown
And that your majesty was a usurper.
Say, man, were these thy words?
An't shall please your majesty, I never said nor
thought any such matter: God is my witness, I am
falsely accused by the villain.
By these ten bones, my lords, he did speak them to
me in the garret one night, as we were scouring my
Lord of York's armour.
Base dunghill villain and mechanical,
I'll have thy head for this thy traitor's speech.
I do beseech your royal majesty,
Let him have all the rigor of the law.
Alas, my lord, hang me, if ever I spake the words.
My accuser is my 'prentice
him for his fault the other day, he did vow upon his
knees he would be even with me: I have good
witness of this: therefore I beseech your majesty,
do not cast away an honest man for a villain's
accusation.
Uncle, what shall we say to this in law?
This doom, my lord, if I may judge:
Let Somerset be regent over the French,
Because in York this breeds suspicion:
And let these have a day appointed them
For single combat in convenient place,
For he hath witness of his servant's malice:
This is the law, and this Duke Humphrey's doom.
I humbly thank your royal majesty.
And I accept the combat willingly.
Alas, my lord, I cannot fight
my case. The spite of man prevaileth against me. O
Lord, have mercy upon me! I shall never be able to
fight a blow. O Lord, my heart!
Sirrah, or you must fight, or else be hang'd.
Away with them to prison
shall be the last of the next month. Come,
Somerset, we'll see thee sent away.
Flourish. Exeunt
SCENE IV. GLOUCESTER's garden.
Enter MARGARET JOURDAIN, HUME, SOUTHWELL, and BOLINGBROKE
Come, my masters
performance of your promises.
Master Hume, we are therefore provided: will her
ladyship behold and hear our exorcisms?
Ay, what else? fear you not her courage.
I have heard her reported to be a woman of an
invincible spirit: but it shall be convenient,
Master Hume, that you be by her aloft, while we be
busy below
and leave us.
Exit HUME
Mother Jourdain, be you
prostrate and grovel on the earth
read you
Enter the DUCHESS aloft, HUME following
Well said, my masters
gear the sooner the better.
Patience, good lady
Deep night, dark night, the silent of the night,
The time of night when Troy was set on fire
The time when screech-owls cry and ban-dogs howl,
And spirits walk and ghosts break up their graves,
That time best fits the work we have in hand.
Madam, sit you and fear not: whom we raise,
We will make fast within a hallow'd verge.
Here they do the ceremonies belonging, and make the  circle
Adsum.
Asmath,
By the eternal God, whose name and power
Thou tremblest at, answer that I shall ask
For, till thou speak, thou shalt not pass from hence.
Ask what thou wilt. That I had said and done!
'First of the king: what shall of him become?'
Reading out of a paper
The duke yet lives that Henry shall depose
But him outlive, and die a violent death.
As the Spirit speaks, SOUTHWELL writes the answer
'What fates await the Duke of Suffolk?'
By water shall he die, and take his end.
'What shall befall the Duke of Somerset?'
Let him shun castles
Safer shall he be upon the sandy plains
Than where castles mounted stand.
Have done, for more I hardly can endure.
Descend to darkness and the burning lake!
False fiend, avoid!
Thunder and lightning. Exit Spirit
Enter YORK and BUCKINGHAM with their Guard and break in
Lay hands upon these traitors and their trash.
Beldam, I think we watch'd you at an inch.
What, madam, are you there? the king and commonweal
Are deeply indebted for this piece of pains:
My lord protector will, I doubt it not,
See you well guerdon'd for these good deserts.
Not half so bad as thine to England's king,
Injurious duke, that threatest where's no cause.
True, madam, none at all: what call you this?
Away with them! let them be clapp'd up close.
And kept asunder. You, madam, shall with us.
Stafford, take her to thee.
Exeunt above DUCHESS and HUME, guarded
We'll see your trinkets here all forthcoming.
All, away!
Exeunt guard with MARGARET JOURDAIN, SOUTHWELL,  and c
Lord Buckingham, methinks, you watch'd her well:
A pretty plot, well chosen to build upon!
Now, pray, my lord, let's see the devil's writ.
What have we here?
Reads
'The duke yet lives, that Henry shall depose
But him outlive, and die a violent death.'
Why, this is just
'Aio te, AEacida, Romanos vincere posse.'
Well, to the rest:
'Tell me what fate awaits the Duke of Suffolk?
By water shall he die, and take his end.
What shall betide the Duke of Somerset?
Let him shun castles
Safer shall he be upon the sandy plains
Than where castles mounted stand.'
Come, come, my lords
These oracles are hardly attain'd,
And hardly understood.
The king is now in progress towards Saint Alban's,
With him the husband of this lovely lady:
Thither go these news, as fast as horse can
carry them:
A sorry breakfast for my lord protector.
Your grace shall give me leave, my Lord of York,
To be the post, in hope of his reward.
At your pleasure, my good lord. Who's within
there, ho!
Enter a Servingman
Invite my Lords of Salisbury and Warwick
To sup with me to-morrow night. Away!
Exeunt
ACT II
SCENE I. Saint Alban's.
Enter KING HENRY VI, QUEEN MARGARET, GLOUCESTER, CARDINAL, and SUFFOLK, with Falconers halloing
Believe me, lords, for flying at the brook,
I saw not better sport these seven years' day:
Yet, by your leave, the wind was very high
And, ten to one, old Joan had not gone out.
But what a point, my lord, your falcon made,
And what a pitch she flew above the rest!
To see how God in all his creatures works!
Yea, man and birds are fain of climbing high.
No marvel, an it like your majesty,
My lord protector's hawks do tower so well
They know their master loves to be aloft,
And bears his thoughts above his falcon's pitch.
My lord, 'tis but a base ignoble mind
That mounts no higher than a bird can soar.
I thought as much
Ay, my lord cardinal? how think you by that?
Were it not good your grace could fly to heaven?
The treasury of everlasting joy.
Thy heaven is on earth
Beat on a crown, the treasure of thy heart
Pernicious protector, dangerous peer,
That smooth'st it so with king and commonweal!
What, cardinal, is your priesthood grown peremptory?
Tantaene animis coelestibus irae?
Churchmen so hot? good uncle, hide such malice
With such holiness can you do it?
No malice, sir
So good a quarrel and so bad a peer.
As who, my lord?
Why, as you, my lord,
An't like your lordly lord-protectorship.
Why, Suffolk, England knows thine insolence.
And thy ambition, Gloucester.
I prithee, peace, good queen,
And whet not on these furious peers
For blessed are the peacemakers on earth.
Let me be blessed for the peace I make,
Against this proud protector, with my sword!
[Aside to CARDINAL]  Faith, holy uncle, would
'twere come to that!
[Aside to GLOUCESTER]  Marry, when thou darest.
[Aside to CARDINAL]  Make up no factious
numbers for the matter
In thine own person answer thy abuse.
[Aside to GLOUCESTER]  Ay, where thou darest
not peep: an if thou darest,
This evening, on the east side of the grove.
How now, my lords!
Believe me, cousin Gloucester,
Had not your man put up the fowl so suddenly,
We had had more sport.
Aside to GLOUCESTER
Come with thy two-hand sword.
True, uncle.
[Aside to GLOUCESTER]  Are ye advised? the
east side of the grove?
[Aside to CARDINAL]  Cardinal, I am with you.
Why, how now, uncle Gloucester!
Talking of hawking
Aside to CARDINAL
Now, by God's mother, priest, I'll shave your crown for this,
Or all my fence shall fail.
[Aside to GLOUCESTER]  Medice, teipsum--
Protector, see to't well, protect yourself.
The winds grow high
How irksome is this music to my heart!
When such strings jar, what hope of harmony?
I pray, my lords, let me compound this strife.
Enter a Townsman of Saint Alban's, crying 'A miracle!'
What means this noise?
Fellow, what miracle dost thou proclaim?
A miracle! a miracle!
Come to the king and tell him what miracle.
Forsooth, a blind man at Saint Alban's shrine,
Within this half-hour, hath received his sight
A man that ne'er saw in his life before.
Now, God be praised, that to believing souls
Gives light in darkness, comfort in despair!
Enter the Mayor of Saint Alban's and his  brethren, bearing SIMPCOX, between two in a chair, SIMPCOX's Wife following
Here comes the townsmen on procession,
To present your highness with the man.
Great is his comfort in this earthly vale,
Although by his sight his sin be multiplied.
Stand by, my masters: bring him near the king
His highness' pleasure is to talk with him.
Good fellow, tell us here the circumstance,
That we for thee may glorify the Lord.
What, hast thou been long blind and now restored?
Born blind, an't please your grace.
Ay, indeed, was he.
What woman is this?
His wife, an't like your worship.
Hadst thou been his mother, thou couldst have
better told.
Where wert thou born?
At Berwick in the north, an't like your grace.
Poor soul, God's goodness hath been great to thee:
Let never day nor night unhallow'd pass,
But still remember what the Lord hath done.
Tell me, good fellow, camest thou here by chance,
Or of devotion, to this holy shrine?
God knows, of pure devotion
A hundred times and oftener, in my sleep,
By good Saint Alban
Come, offer at my shrine, and I will help thee.'
Most true, forsooth
Myself have heard a voice to call him so.
What, art thou lame?
Ay, God Almighty help me!
How camest thou so?
A fall off of a tree.
A plum-tree, master.
How long hast thou been blind?
Born so, master.
What, and wouldst climb a tree?
But that in all my life, when I was a youth.
Too true
Mass, thou lovedst plums well, that wouldst
venture so.
Alas,  good master, my wife desired some damsons,
And made me climb, with danger of my life.
A subtle knave! but yet it shall not serve.
Let me see thine eyes: wink now: now open them:
In my opinion yet thou seest not well.
Yes, master, clear as day, I thank God and
Saint Alban.
Say'st thou me so? What colour is this cloak of?
Red, master
Why, that's well said. What colour is my gown of?
Black, forsooth: coal-black as jet.
Why, then, thou know'st what colour jet is of?
And yet, I think, jet did he never see.
But cloaks and gowns, before this day, a many.
Never, before this day, in all his life.
Tell me, sirrah, what's my name?
Alas, master, I know not.
What's his name?
I know not.
Nor his?
No, indeed, master.
What's thine own name?
Saunder Simpcox, an if it please you, master.
Then, Saunder, sit there, the lyingest knave in
Christendom. If thou hadst been born blind, thou
mightest as well have known all our names as thus to
name the several colours we do wear. Sight may
distinguish of colours, but suddenly to nominate them
all, it is impossible. My lords, Saint Alban here
hath done a miracle
cunning to be great, that could restore this cripple
to his legs again?
O master, that you could!
My masters of Saint Alban's, have you not beadles in
your town, and things called whips?
Yes, my lord, if it please your grace.
Then send for one presently.
Sirrah, go fetch the beadle hither straight.
Exit an Attendant
Now fetch me a stool hither by and by. Now, sirrah,
if you mean to save yourself from whipping, leap me
over this stool and run away.
Alas, master, I am not able to stand alone:
You go about to torture me in vain.
Enter a Beadle with whips
Well, sir, we must have you find your legs. Sirrah
beadle, whip him till he leap over that same stool.
I will, my lord. Come on, sirrah
doublet quickly.
Alas, master, what shall I do? I am not able to stand.
After the Beadle hath hit him once, he leaps over the stool and runs away
O God, seest Thou this, and bearest so long?
It made me laugh to see the villain run.
Follow the knave
Alas, sir, we did it for pure need.
Let them be whipped through every market-town, till
they come to Berwick, from whence they came.
Exeunt Wife, Beadle, Mayor,  and c
Duke Humphrey has done a miracle to-day.
True
But you have done more miracles than I
You made in a day, my lord, whole towns to fly.
Enter BUCKINGHAM
What tidings with our cousin Buckingham?
Such as my heart doth tremble to unfold.
A sort of naughty persons, lewdly bent,
Under the countenance and confederacy
Of Lady Eleanor, the protector's wife,
The ringleader and head of all this rout,
Have practised dangerously against your state,
Dealing with witches and with conjurers:
Whom we have apprehended in the fact
Raising up wicked spirits from under ground,
Demanding of King Henry's life and death,
And other of your highness' privy-council
As more at large your grace shall understand.
[Aside to GLOUCESTER]  And so, my lord protector,
by this means
Your lady is forthcoming yet at London.
This news, I think, hath turn'd your weapon's edge
'Tis like, my lord, you will not keep your hour.
Ambitious churchman, leave to afflict my heart:
Sorrow and grief have vanquish'd all my powers
And, vanquish'd as I am, I yield to thee,
Or to the meanest groom.
O God, what mischiefs work the wicked ones,
Heaping confusion on their own heads thereby!
Gloucester, see here the tainture of thy nest.
And look thyself be faultless, thou wert best.
Madam, for myself, to heaven I do appeal,
How I have loved my king and commonweal:
And, for my wife, I know not how it stands
Sorry I am to hear what I have heard:
Noble she is, but if she have forgot
Honour and virtue and conversed with such
As, like to pitch, defile nobility,
I banish her my bed and company
And give her as a prey to law and shame,
That hath dishonour'd Gloucester's honest name.
Well, for this night we will repose us here:
To-morrow toward London back again,
To look into this business thoroughly
And call these foul offenders to their answers
And poise the cause in justice' equal scales,
Whose beam stands sure, whose rightful cause prevails.
Flourish. Exeunt
SCENE II. London. YORK'S garden.
Enter YORK, SALISBURY, and WARWICK
Now, my good Lords of Salisbury and Warwick,
Our simple supper ended, give me leave
In this close walk to satisfy myself,
In craving your opinion of my title,
Which is infallible, to England's crown.
My lord, I long to hear it at full.
Sweet York, begin: and if thy claim be good,
The Nevils are thy subjects to command.
Then thus:
Edward the Third, my lords, had seven sons:
The first, Edward the Black Prince, Prince of Wales
The second, William of Hatfield, and the third,
Lionel Duke of Clarence: next to whom
Was John of Gaunt, the Duke of Lancaster
The fifth was Edmund Langley, Duke of York
The sixth was Thomas of Woodstock, Duke of Gloucester
William of Windsor was the seventh and last.
Edward the Black Prince died before his father
And left behind him Richard, his only son,
Who after Edward the Third's death reign'd as king
Till Henry Bolingbroke, Duke of Lancaster,
The eldest son and heir of John of Gaunt,
Crown'd by the name of Henry the Fourth,
Seized on the realm, deposed the rightful king,
Sent his poor queen to France, from whence she came,
And him to Pomfret
Harmless Richard was murder'd traitorously.
Father, the duke hath told the truth:
Thus got the house of Lancaster the crown.
Which now they hold by force and not by right
For Richard, the first son's heir, being dead,
The issue of the next son should have reign'd.
But William of Hatfield died without an heir.
The third son, Duke of Clarence, from whose line
I claimed the crown, had issue, Philippe, a daughter,
Who married Edmund Mortimer, Earl of March:
Edmund had issue, Roger Earl of March
Roger had issue, Edmund, Anne and Eleanor.
This Edmund, in the reign of Bolingbroke,
As I have read, laid claim unto the crown
And, but for Owen Glendower, had been king,
Who kept him in captivity till he died.
But to the rest.
His eldest sister, Anne,
My mother, being heir unto the crown
Married Richard Earl of Cambridge
To Edmund Langley, Edward the Third's fifth son.
By her I claim the kingdom: she was heir
To Roger Earl of March, who was the son
Of Edmund Mortimer, who married Philippe,
Sole daughter unto Lionel Duke of Clarence:
So, if the issue of the elder son
Succeed before the younger, I am king.
What plain proceeding is more plain than this?
Henry doth claim the crown from John of Gaunt,
The fourth son
Till Lionel's issue fails, his should not reign:
It fails not yet, but flourishes in thee
And in thy sons, fair slips of such a stock.
Then, father Salisbury, kneel we together
And in this private plot be we the first
That shall salute our rightful sovereign
With honour of his birthright to the crown.
Long live our sovereign Richard, England's king!
We thank you, lords. But I am not your king
Till I be crown'd and that my sword be stain'd
With heart-blood of the house of Lancaster
And that's not suddenly to be perform'd,
But with advice and silent secrecy.
Do you as I do in these dangerous days:
Wink at the Duke of Suffolk's insolence,
At Beaufort's pride, at Somerset's ambition,
At Buckingham and all the crew of them,
Till they have snared the shepherd of the flock,
That virtuous prince, the good Duke Humphrey:
'Tis that they seek, and they in seeking that
Shall find their deaths, if York can prophesy.
My lord, break we off
My heart assures me that the Earl of Warwick
Shall one day make the Duke of York a king.
And, Nevil, this I do assure myself:
Richard shall live to make the Earl of Warwick
The greatest man in England but the king.
Exeunt
SCENE III. A hall of justice.
Sound trumpets. Enter KING HENRY VI, QUEEN  MARGARET, GLOUCESTER, YORK, SUFFOLK, and SALISBURY
Stand forth, Dame Eleanor Cobham, Gloucester's wife:
In sight of God and us, your guilt is great:
Receive the sentence of the law for sins
Such as by God's book are adjudged to death.
You four, from hence to prison back again
From thence unto the place of execution:
The witch in Smithfield shall be burn'd to ashes,
And you three shall be strangled on the gallows.
You, madam, for you are more nobly born,
Despoiled of your honour in your life,
Shall, after three days' open penance done,
Live in your country here in banishment,
With Sir John Stanley, in the Isle of Man.
Welcome is banishment
Eleanor, the law, thou see'st, hath judged thee:
I cannot justify whom the law condemns.
Exeunt DUCHESS and other prisoners, guarded
Mine eyes are full of tears, my heart of grief.
Ah, Humphrey, this dishonour in thine age
Will bring thy head with sorrow to the ground!
I beseech your majesty, give me leave to go
Sorrow would solace and mine age would ease.
Stay, Humphrey Duke of Gloucester: ere thou go,
Give up thy staff: Henry will to himself
Protector be
My stay, my guide and lantern to my feet:
And go in peace, Humphrey, no less beloved
Than when thou wert protector to thy King.
I see no reason why a king of years
Should be to be protected like a child.
God and King Henry govern England's realm.
Give up your staff, sir, and the king his realm.
My staff? here, noble Henry, is my staff:
As willingly do I the same resign
As e'er thy father Henry made it mine
And even as willingly at thy feet I leave it
As others would ambitiously receive it.
Farewell, good king: when I am dead and gone,
May honourable peace attend thy throne!
Exit
Why, now is Henry king, and Margaret queen
And Humphrey Duke of Gloucester scarce himself,
That bears so shrewd a maim
His lady banish'd, and a limb lopp'd off.
This staff of honour raught, there let it stand
Where it best fits to be, in Henry's hand.
Thus droops this lofty pine and hangs his sprays
Thus Eleanor's pride dies in her youngest days.
Lords, let him go. Please it your majesty,
This is the day appointed for the combat
And ready are the appellant and defendant,
The armourer and his man, to enter the lists,
So please your highness to behold the fight.
Ay, good my lord
Left I the court, to see this quarrel tried.
O God's name, see the lists and all things fit:
Here let them end it
I never saw a fellow worse bested,
Or more afraid to fight, than is the appellant,
The servant of this armourer, my lords.
Enter at one door, HORNER, the Armourer, and his  Neighbours, drinking to him so much that he is drunk
Here, neighbour Horner, I drink to you in a cup of
sack: and fear not, neighbour, you shall do well enough.
And here, neighbour, here's a cup of charneco.
And here's a pot of good double beer, neighbour:
drink, and fear not your man.
Let it come, i' faith, and I'll pledge you all
a fig for Peter!
First 'Prentice	Here, Peter, I drink to thee: and be not afraid.
Second 'Prentice	Be merry, Peter, and fear not thy master: fight
for credit of the 'prentices.
I thank you all: drink, and pray for me, I pray
you
this world. Here, Robin, an if I die, I give thee
my apron: and, Will, thou shalt have my hammer:
and here, Tom, take all the money that I have. O
Lord bless me! I pray God! for I am never able to
deal with my master, he hath learnt me so much fence already.
Come, leave your drinking, and fall to blows.
Sirrah, what's thy name?
Peter, forsooth.
Peter! what more?
Thump.
Thump! then see thou thump thy master well.
Masters, I am come hither, as it were, upon my man's
instigation, to prove him a knave and myself an
honest man: and touching the Duke of York, I will
take my death, I never meant him any ill, nor the
king, nor the queen: and therefore, Peter, have at
thee with a downright blow!
Dispatch: this knave's tongue begins to double.
Sound, trumpets, alarum to the combatants!
Alarum. They fight, and PETER strikes him down
Hold, Peter, hold! I confess, I confess treason.
Dies
Take away his weapon. Fellow, thank God, and the
good wine in thy master's way.
O God, have I overcome mine enemy in this presence?
O Peter, thou hast prevailed in right!
Go, take hence that traitor from our sight
For his death we do perceive his guilt:
And God in justice hath revealed to us
The truth and innocence of this poor fellow,
Which he had thought to have murder'd wrongfully.
Come, fellow, follow us for thy reward.
Sound a flourish. Exeunt
SCENE IV. A street.
Enter GLOUCESTER and his Servingmen, in mourning cloaks
Thus sometimes hath the brightest day a cloud
And after summer evermore succeeds
Barren winter, with his wrathful nipping cold:
So cares and joys abound, as seasons fleet.
Sirs, what's o'clock?
Ten, my lord.
Ten is the hour that was appointed me
To watch the coming of my punish'd duchess:
Uneath may she endure the flinty streets,
To tread them with her tender-feeling feet.
Sweet Nell, ill can thy noble mind abrook
The abject people gazing on thy face,
With envious looks, laughing at thy shame,
That erst did follow thy proud chariot-wheels
When thou didst ride in triumph through the streets.
But, soft! I think she comes
My tear-stain'd eyes to see her miseries.
Enter the DUCHESS in a white sheet, and a taper  burning in her hand
So please your grace, we'll take her from the sheriff.
No, stir not, for your lives
Come you, my lord, to see my open shame?
Now thou dost penance too. Look how they gaze!
See how the giddy multitude do point,
And nod their heads, and throw their eyes on thee!
Ah, Gloucester, hide thee from their hateful looks,
And, in thy closet pent up, rue my shame,
And ban thine enemies, both mine and thine!
Be patient, gentle Nell
Ah, Gloucester, teach me to forget myself!
For whilst I think I am thy married wife
And thou a prince, protector of this land,
Methinks I should not thus be led along,
Mail'd up in shame, with papers on my back,
And followed with a rabble that rejoice
To see my tears and hear my deep-fet groans.
The ruthless flint doth cut my tender feet,
And when I start, the envious people laugh
And bid me be advised how I tread.
Ah, Humphrey, can I bear this shameful yoke?
Trow'st thou that e'er I'll look upon the world,
Or count them happy that enjoy the sun?
No
To think upon my pomp shall be my hell.
Sometime I'll say, I am Duke Humphrey's wife,
And he a prince and ruler of the land:
Yet so he ruled and such a prince he was
As he stood by whilst I, his forlorn duchess,
Was made a wonder and a pointing-stock
To every idle rascal follower.
But be thou mild and blush not at my shame,
Nor stir at nothing till the axe of death
Hang over thee, as, sure, it shortly will
For Suffolk, he that can do all in all
With her that hateth thee and hates us all,
And York and impious Beaufort, that false priest,
Have all limed bushes to betray thy wings,
And, fly thou how thou canst, they'll tangle thee:
But fear not thou, until thy foot be snared,
Nor never seek prevention of thy foes.
Ah, Nell, forbear! thou aimest all awry
I must offend before I be attainted
And had I twenty times so many foes,
And each of them had twenty times their power,
All these could not procure me any scathe,
So long as I am loyal, true and crimeless.
Wouldst have me rescue thee from this reproach?
Why, yet thy scandal were not wiped away
But I in danger for the breach of law.
Thy greatest help is quiet, gentle Nell:
I pray thee, sort thy heart to patience
These few days' wonder will be quickly worn.
Enter a Herald
I summon your grace to his majesty's parliament,
Holden at Bury the first of this next month.
And my consent ne'er ask'd herein before!
This is close dealing. Well, I will be there.
Exit Herald
My Nell, I take my leave: and, master sheriff,
Let not her penance exceed the king's commission.
An't please your grace, here my commission stays,
And Sir John Stanley is appointed now
To take her with him to the Isle of Man.
Must you, Sir John, protect my lady here?
So am I given in charge, may't please your grace.
Entreat her not the worse in that I pray
You use her well: the world may laugh again
And I may live to do you kindness if
You do it her: and so, Sir John, farewell!
What, gone, my lord, and bid me not farewell!
Witness my tears, I cannot stay to speak.
Exeunt GLOUCESTER and Servingmen
Art thou gone too? all comfort go with thee!
For none abides with me: my joy is death
Death, at whose name I oft have been afear'd,
Because I wish'd this world's eternity.
Stanley, I prithee, go, and take me hence
I care not whither, for I beg no favour,
Only convey me where thou art commanded.
Why, madam, that is to the Isle of Man
There to be used according to your state.
That's bad enough, for I am but reproach:
And shall I then be used reproachfully?
Like to a duchess, and Duke Humphrey's lady
According to that state you shall be used.
Sheriff, farewell, and better than I fare,
Although thou hast been conduct of my shame.
It is my office
Ay, ay, farewell
Come, Stanley, shall we go?
Madam, your penance done, throw off this sheet,
And go we to attire you for our journey.
My shame will not be shifted with my sheet:
No, it will hang upon my richest robes
And show itself, attire me how I can.
Go, lead the way
Exeunt
ACT III
SCENE I. The Abbey at Bury St. Edmund's.
Sound a sennet. Enter KING HENRY VI, QUEEN  MARGARET, CARDINAL, SUFFOLK, YORK, BUCKINGHAM, SALISBURY and WARWICK to the Parliament
I muse my Lord of Gloucester is not come:
'Tis not his wont to be the hindmost man,
Whate'er occasion keeps him from us now.
Can you not see? or will ye not observe
The strangeness of his alter'd countenance?
With what a majesty he bears himself,
How insolent of late he is become,
How proud, how peremptory, and unlike himself?
We know the time since he was mild and affable,
And if we did but glance a far-off look,
Immediately he was upon his knee,
That all the court admired him for submission:
But meet him now, and, be it in the morn,
When every one will give the time of day,
He knits his brow and shows an angry eye,
And passeth by with stiff unbowed knee,
Disdaining duty that to us belongs.
Small curs are not regarded when they grin
But great men tremble when the lion roars
And Humphrey is no little man in England.
First note that he is near you in descent,
And should you fall, he as the next will mount.
Me seemeth then it is no policy,
Respecting what a rancorous mind he bears
And his advantage following your decease,
That he should come about your royal person
Or be admitted to your highness' council.
By flattery hath he won the commons' hearts,
And when he please to make commotion,
'Tis to be fear'd they all will follow him.
Now 'tis the spring, and weeds are shallow-rooted
Suffer them now, and they'll o'ergrow the garden
And choke the herbs for want of husbandry.
The reverent care I bear unto my lord
Made me collect these dangers in the duke.
If it be fond, call it a woman's fear
Which fear if better reasons can supplant,
I will subscribe and say I wrong'd the duke.
My Lord of Suffolk, Buckingham, and York,
Reprove my allegation, if you can
Or else conclude my words effectual.
Well hath your highness seen into this duke
And, had I first been put to speak my mind,
I think I should have told your grace's tale.
The duchess, by his subornation,
Upon my life, began her devilish practises:
Or, if he were not privy to those faults,
Yet, by reputing of his high descent,
As next the king he was successive heir,
And such high vaunts of his nobility,
Did instigate the bedlam brain-sick duchess
By wicked means to frame our sovereign's fall.
Smooth runs the water where the brook is deep
And in his simple show he harbours treason.
The fox barks not when he would steal the lamb.
No, no, my sovereign
Unsounded yet and full of deep deceit.
Did he not, contrary to form of law,
Devise strange deaths for small offences done?
And did he not, in his protectorship,
Levy great sums of money through the realm
For soldiers' pay in France, and never sent it?
By means whereof the towns each day revolted.
Tut, these are petty faults to faults unknown.
Which time will bring to light in smooth
Duke Humphrey.
My lords, at once: the care you have of us,
To mow down thorns that would annoy our foot,
Is worthy praise: but, shall I speak my conscience,
Our kinsman Gloucester is as innocent
From meaning treason to our royal person
As is the sucking lamb or harmless dove:
The duke is virtuous, mild and too well given
To dream on evil or to work my downfall.
Ah, what's more dangerous than this fond affiance!
Seems he a dove? his feathers are but borrowed,
For he's disposed as the hateful raven:
Is he a lamb? his skin is surely lent him,
For he's inclined as is the ravenous wolf.
Who cannot steal a shape that means deceit?
Take heed, my lord
Hangs on the cutting short that fraudful man.
Enter SOMERSET
All health unto my gracious sovereign!
Welcome, Lord Somerset. What news from France?
That all your interest in those territories
Is utterly bereft you
Cold news, Lord Somerset: but God's will be done!
[Aside]  Cold news for me
As firmly as I hope for fertile England.
Thus are my blossoms blasted in the bud
And caterpillars eat my leaves away
But I will remedy this gear ere long,
Or sell my title for a glorious grave.
Enter GLOUCESTER
All happiness unto my lord the king!
Pardon, my liege, that I have stay'd so long.
Nay, Gloucester, know that thou art come too soon,
Unless thou wert more loyal than thou art:
I do arrest thee of high treason here.
Well, Suffolk, thou shalt not see me blush
Nor change my countenance for this arrest:
A heart unspotted is not easily daunted.
The purest spring is not so free from mud
As I am clear from treason to my sovereign:
Who can accuse me? wherein am I guilty?
'Tis thought, my lord, that you took bribes of France,
And, being protector, stayed the soldiers' pay
By means whereof his highness hath lost France.
Is it but thought so? what are they that think it?
I never robb'd the soldiers of their pay,
Nor ever had one penny bribe from France.
So help me God, as I have watch'd the night,
Ay, night by night, in studying good for England,
That doit that e'er I wrested from the king,
Or any groat I hoarded to my use,
Be brought against me at my trial-day!
No
Because I would not tax the needy commons,
Have I disbursed to the garrisons,
And never ask'd for restitution.
It serves you well, my lord, to say so much.
I say no more than truth, so help me God!
In your protectorship you did devise
Strange tortures for offenders never heard of,
That England was defamed by tyranny.
Why, 'tis well known that, whiles I was
protector,
Pity was all the fault that was in me
For I should melt at an offender's tears,
And lowly words were ransom for their fault.
Unless it were a bloody murderer,
Or foul felonious thief that fleeced poor passengers,
I never gave them condign punishment:
Murder indeed, that bloody sin, I tortured
Above the felon or what trespass else.
My lord, these faults are easy, quickly answered:
But mightier crimes are laid unto your charge,
Whereof you cannot easily purge yourself.
I do arrest you in his highness' name
And here commit you to my lord cardinal
To keep, until your further time of trial.
My lord of Gloucester, 'tis my special hope
That you will clear yourself from all suspect:
My conscience tells me you are innocent.
Ah, gracious lord, these days are dangerous:
Virtue is choked with foul ambition
And charity chased hence by rancour's hand
Foul subornation is predominant
And equity exiled your highness' land.
I know their complot is to have my life,
And if my death might make this island happy,
And prove the period of their tyranny,
I would expend it with all willingness:
But mine is made the prologue to their play
For thousands more, that yet suspect no peril,
Will not conclude their plotted tragedy.
Beaufort's red sparkling eyes blab his heart's malice,
And Suffolk's cloudy brow his stormy hate
Sharp Buckingham unburthens with his tongue
The envious load that lies upon his heart
And dogged York, that reaches at the moon,
Whose overweening arm I have pluck'd back,
By false accuse doth level at my life:
And you, my sovereign lady, with the rest,
Causeless have laid disgraces on my head,
And with your best endeavour have stirr'd up
My liefest liege to be mine enemy:
Ay, all you have laid your heads together--
Myself had notice of your conventicles--
And all to make away my guiltless life.
I shall not want false witness to condemn me,
Nor store of treasons to augment my guilt
The ancient proverb will be well effected:
'A staff is quickly found to beat a dog.'
My liege, his railing is intolerable:
If those that care to keep your royal person
From treason's secret knife and traitors' rage
Be thus upbraided, chid and rated at,
And the offender granted scope of speech,
'Twill make them cool in zeal unto your grace.
Hath he not twit our sovereign lady here
With ignominious words, though clerkly couch'd,
As if she had suborned some to swear
False allegations to o'erthrow his state?
But I can give the loser leave to chide.
Far truer spoke than meant: I lose, indeed
Beshrew the winners, for they play'd me false!
And well such losers may have leave to speak.
He'll wrest the sense and hold us here all day:
Lord cardinal, he is your prisoner.
Sirs, take away the duke, and guard him sure.
Ah! thus King Henry throws away his crutch
Before his legs be firm to bear his body.
Thus is the shepherd beaten from thy side,
And wolves are gnarling who shall gnaw thee first.
Ah, that my fear were false! ah, that it were!
For, good King Henry, thy decay I fear.
Exit, guarded
My lords, what to your wisdoms seemeth best,
Do or undo, as if ourself were here.
What, will your highness leave the parliament?
Ay, Margaret
Whose flood begins to flow within mine eyes,
My body round engirt with misery,
For what's more miserable than discontent?
Ah, uncle Humphrey! in thy face I see
The map of honour, truth and loyalty:
And yet, good Humphrey, is the hour to come
That e'er I proved thee false or fear'd thy faith.
What louring star now envies thy estate,
That these great lords and Margaret our queen
Do seek subversion of thy harmless life?
Thou never didst them wrong, nor no man wrong
And as the butcher takes away the calf
And binds the wretch, and beats it when it strays,
Bearing it to the bloody slaughter-house,
Even so remorseless have they borne him hence
And as the dam runs lowing up and down,
Looking the way her harmless young one went,
And can do nought but wail her darling's loss,
Even so myself bewails good Gloucester's case
With sad unhelpful tears, and with dimm'd eyes
Look after him and cannot do him good,
So mighty are his vowed enemies.
His fortunes I will weep
Say 'Who's a traitor? Gloucester he is none.'
Exeunt all but QUEEN MARGARET, CARDINAL, SUFFOLK, and YORK
Free lords, cold snow melts with the sun's hot beams.
Henry my lord is cold in great affairs,
Too full of foolish pity, and Gloucester's show
Beguiles him as the mournful crocodile
With sorrow snares relenting passengers,
Or as the snake roll'd in a flowering bank,
With shining chequer'd slough, doth sting a child
That for the beauty thinks it excellent.
Believe me, lords, were none more wise than I--
And yet herein I judge mine own wit good--
This Gloucester should be quickly rid the world,
To rid us of the fear we have of him.
That he should die is worthy policy
But yet we want a colour for his death:
'Tis meet he be condemn'd by course of law.
But, in my mind, that were no policy:
The king will labour still to save his life,
The commons haply rise, to save his life
And yet we have but trivial argument,
More than mistrust, that shows him worthy death.
So that, by this, you would not have him die.
Ah, York, no man alive so fain as I!
'Tis York that hath more reason for his death.
But, my lord cardinal, and you, my Lord of Suffolk,
Say as you think, and speak it from your souls,
Were't not all one, an empty eagle were set
To guard the chicken from a hungry kite,
As place Duke Humphrey for the king's protector?
So the poor chicken should be sure of death.
Madam, 'tis true
To make the fox surveyor of the fold?
Who being accused a crafty murderer,
His guilt should be but idly posted over,
Because his purpose is not executed.
No
By nature proved an enemy to the flock,
Before his chaps be stain'd with crimson blood,
As Humphrey, proved by reasons, to my liege.
And do not stand on quillets how to slay him:
Be it by gins, by snares, by subtlety,
Sleeping or waking, 'tis no matter how,
So he be dead
Which mates him first that first intends deceit.
Thrice-noble Suffolk, 'tis resolutely spoke.
Not resolute, except so much were done
For things are often spoke and seldom meant:
But that my heart accordeth with my tongue,
Seeing the deed is meritorious,
And to preserve my sovereign from his foe,
Say but the word, and I will be his priest.
But I would have him dead, my Lord of Suffolk,
Ere you can take due orders for a priest:
Say you consent and censure well the deed,
And I'll provide his executioner,
I tender so the safety of my liege.
Here is my hand, the deed is worthy doing.
And so say I.
And I    and now we three have spoke it,
It skills not greatly who impugns our doom.
Enter a Post
Great lords, from Ireland am I come amain,
To signify that rebels there are up
And put the Englishmen unto the sword:
Send succors, lords, and stop the rage betime,
Before the wound do grow uncurable
For, being green, there is great hope of help.
A breach that craves a quick expedient stop!
What counsel give you in this weighty cause?
That Somerset be sent as regent thither:
'Tis meet that lucky ruler be employ'd
Witness the fortune he hath had in France.
If York, with all his far-fet policy,
Had been the regent there instead of me,
He never would have stay'd in France so long.
No, not to lose it all, as thou hast done:
I rather would have lost my life betimes
Than bring a burthen of dishonour home
By staying there so long till all were lost.
Show me one scar character'd on thy skin:
Men's flesh preserved so whole do seldom win.
Nay, then, this spark will prove a raging fire,
If wind and fuel be brought to feed it with:
No more, good York
Thy fortune, York, hadst thou been regent there,
Might happily have proved far worse than his.
What, worse than nought? nay, then, a shame take all!
And, in the number, thee that wishest shame!
My Lord of York, try what your fortune is.
The uncivil kerns of Ireland are in arms
And temper clay with blood of Englishmen:
To Ireland will you lead a band of men,
Collected choicely, from each county some,
And try your hap against the Irishmen?
I will, my lord, so please his majesty.
Why, our authority is his consent,
And what we do establish he confirms:
Then, noble York, take thou this task in hand.
I am content: provide me soldiers, lords,
Whiles I take order for mine own affairs.
A charge, Lord York, that I will see perform'd.
But now return we to the false Duke Humphrey.
No more of him
That henceforth he shall trouble us no more.
And so break off
Lord Suffolk, you and I must talk of that event.
My Lord of Suffolk, within fourteen days
At Bristol I expect my soldiers
For there I'll ship them all for Ireland.
I'll see it truly done, my Lord of York.
Exeunt all but YORK
Now, York, or never, steel thy fearful thoughts,
And change misdoubt to resolution:
Be that thou hopest to be, or what thou art
Resign to death
Let pale-faced fear keep with the mean-born man,
And find no harbour in a royal heart.
Faster than spring-time showers comes thought
on thought,
And not a thought but thinks on dignity.
My brain more busy than the labouring spider
Weaves tedious snares to trap mine enemies.
Well, nobles, well, 'tis politicly done,
To send me packing with an host of men:
I fear me you but warm the starved snake,
Who, cherish'd in your breasts, will sting
your hearts.
'Twas men I lack'd and you will give them me:
I take it kindly
You put sharp weapons in a madman's hands.
Whiles I in Ireland nourish a mighty band,
I will stir up in England some black storm
Shall blow ten thousand souls to heaven or hell
And this fell tempest shall not cease to rage
Until the golden circuit on my head,
Like to the glorious sun's transparent beams,
Do calm the fury of this mad-bred flaw.
And, for a minister of my intent,
I have seduced a headstrong Kentishman,
John Cade of Ashford,
To make commotion, as full well he can,
Under the title of John Mortimer.
In Ireland have I seen this stubborn Cade
Oppose himself against a troop of kerns,
And fought so long, till that his thighs with darts
Were almost like a sharp-quill'd porpentine
And, in the end being rescued, I have seen
Him caper upright like a wild Morisco,
Shaking the bloody darts as he his bells.
Full often, like a shag-hair'd crafty kern,
Hath he conversed with the enemy,
And undiscover'd come to me again
And given me notice of their villanies.
This devil here shall be my substitute
For that John Mortimer, which now is dead,
In face, in gait, in speech, he doth resemble:
By this I shall perceive the commons' mind,
How they affect the house and claim of York.
Say he be taken, rack'd and tortured,
I know no pain they can inflict upon him
Will make him say I moved him to those arms.
Say that he thrive, as 'tis great like he will,
Why, then from Ireland come I with my strength
And reap the harvest which that rascal sow'd
For Humphrey being dead, as he shall be,
And Henry put apart, the next for me.
Exit
SCENE II. Bury St. Edmund's. A room of state.
Enter certain Murderers, hastily
Run to my Lord of Suffolk
We have dispatch'd the duke, as he commanded.
O that it were to do! What have we done?
Didst ever hear a man so penitent?
Enter SUFFOLK
Here comes my lord.
Now, sirs, have you dispatch'd this thing?
Ay, my good lord, he's dead.
Why, that's well said. Go, get you to my house
I will reward you for this venturous deed.
The king and all the peers are here at hand.
Have you laid fair the bed? Is all things well,
According as I gave directions?
'Tis, my good lord.
Away! be gone.
Exeunt Murderers
Sound trumpets. Enter KING HENRY VI, QUEEN MARGARET, CARDINAL, SOMERSET, with Attendants
Go, call our uncle to our presence straight
Say we intend to try his grace to-day.
If he be guilty, as 'tis published.
I'll call him presently, my noble lord.
Exit
Lords, take your places
Proceed no straiter 'gainst our uncle Gloucester
Than from true evidence of good esteem
He be approved in practise culpable.
God forbid any malice should prevail,
That faultless may condemn a nobleman!
Pray God he may acquit him of suspicion!
I thank thee, Meg
Re-enter SUFFOLK
How now! why look'st thou pale? why tremblest thou?
Where is our uncle? what's the matter, Suffolk?
Dead in his bed, my lord
Marry, God forfend!
God's secret judgment: I did dream to-night
The duke was dumb and could not speak a word.
KING HENRY VI swoons
How fares my lord? Help, lords! the king is dead.
Rear up his body
Run, go, help, help! O Henry, ope thine eyes!
He doth revive again: madam, be patient.
O heavenly God!
How fares my gracious lord?
Comfort, my sovereign! gracious Henry, comfort!
What, doth my Lord of Suffolk comfort me?
Came he right now to sing a raven's note,
Whose dismal tune bereft my vital powers
And thinks he that the chirping of a wren,
By crying comfort from a hollow breast,
Can chase away the first-conceived sound?
Hide not thy poison with such sugar'd words
Lay not thy hands on me
Their touch affrights me as a serpent's sting.
Thou baleful messenger, out of my sight!
Upon thy eye-balls murderous tyranny
Sits in grim majesty, to fright the world.
Look not upon me, for thine eyes are wounding:
Yet do not go away: come, basilisk,
And kill the innocent gazer with thy sight
For in the shade of death I shall find joy
In life but double death, now Gloucester's dead.
Why do you rate my Lord of Suffolk thus?
Although the duke was enemy to him,
Yet he most Christian-like laments his death:
And for myself, foe as he was to me,
Might liquid tears or heart-offending groans
Or blood-consuming sighs recall his life,
I would be blind with weeping, sick with groans,
Look pale as primrose with blood-drinking sighs,
And all to have the noble duke alive.
What know I how the world may deem of me?
For it is known we were but hollow friends:
It may be judged I made the duke away
So shall my name with slander's tongue be wounded,
And princes' courts be fill'd with my reproach.
This get I by his death: ay me, unhappy!
To be a queen, and crown'd with infamy!
Ah, woe is me for Gloucester, wretched man!
Be woe for me, more wretched than he is.
What, dost thou turn away and hide thy face?
I am no loathsome leper
What! art thou, like the adder, waxen deaf?
Be poisonous too and kill thy forlorn queen.
Is all thy comfort shut in Gloucester's tomb?
Why, then, dame Margaret was ne'er thy joy.
Erect his statue and worship it,
And make my image but an alehouse sign.
Was I for this nigh wreck'd upon the sea
And twice by awkward wind from England's bank
Drove back again unto my native clime?
What boded this, but well forewarning wind
Did seem to say 'Seek not a scorpion's nest,
Nor set no footing on this unkind shore'?
What did I then, but cursed the gentle gusts
And he that loosed them forth their brazen caves:
And bid them blow towards England's blessed shore,
Or turn our stern upon a dreadful rock
Yet AEolus would not be a murderer,
But left that hateful office unto thee:
The pretty-vaulting sea refused to drown me,
Knowing that thou wouldst have me drown'd on shore,
With tears as salt as sea, through thy unkindness:
The splitting rocks cower'd in the sinking sands
And would not dash me with their ragged sides,
Because thy flinty heart, more hard than they,
Might in thy palace perish Margaret.
As far as I could ken thy chalky cliffs,
When from thy shore the tempest beat us back,
I stood upon the hatches in the storm,
And when the dusky sky began to rob
My earnest-gaping sight of thy land's view,
I took a costly jewel from my neck,
A heart it was, bound in with diamonds,
And threw it towards thy land: the sea received it,
And so I wish'd thy body might my heart:
And even with this I lost fair England's view
And bid mine eyes be packing with my heart
And call'd them blind and dusky spectacles,
For losing ken of Albion's wished coast.
How often have I tempted Suffolk's tongue,
The agent of thy foul inconstancy,
To sit and witch me, as Ascanius did
When he to madding Dido would unfold
His father's acts commenced in burning Troy!
Am I not witch'd like her? or thou not false like him?
Ay me, I can no more! die, Margaret!
For Henry weeps that thou dost live so long.
Noise within. Enter WARWICK, SALISBURY, and many Commons
It is reported, mighty sovereign,
That good Duke Humphrey traitorously is murder'd
By Suffolk and the Cardinal Beaufort's means.
The commons, like an angry hive of bees
That want their leader, scatter up and down
And care not who they sting in his revenge.
Myself have calm'd their spleenful mutiny,
Until they hear the order of his death.
That he is dead, good Warwick, 'tis too true
But how he died God knows, not Henry:
Enter his chamber, view his breathless corpse,
And comment then upon his sudden death.
That shall I do, my liege. Stay, Salisbury,
With the rude multitude till I return.
Exit
O Thou that judgest all things, stay my thoughts,
My thoughts, that labour to persuade my soul
Some violent hands were laid on Humphrey's life!
If my suspect be false, forgive me, God,
For judgment only doth belong to thee.
Fain would I go to chafe his paly lips
With twenty thousand kisses, and to drain
Upon his face an ocean of salt tears,
To tell my love unto his dumb deaf trunk,
And with my fingers feel his hand unfeeling:
But all in vain are these mean obsequies
And to survey his dead and earthly image,
What were it but to make my sorrow greater?
Re-enter WARWICK and others, bearing GLOUCESTER'S body on a bed
Come hither, gracious sovereign, view this body.
That is to see how deep my grave is made
For with his soul fled all my worldly solace,
For seeing him I see my life in death.
As surely as my soul intends to live
With that dread King that took our state upon him
To free us from his father's wrathful curse,
I do believe that violent hands were laid
Upon the life of this thrice-famed duke.
A dreadful oath, sworn with a solemn tongue!
What instance gives Lord Warwick for his vow?
See how the blood is settled in his face.
Oft have I seen a timely-parted ghost,
Of ashy semblance, meagre, pale and bloodless,
Being all descended to the labouring heart
Who, in the conflict that it holds with death,
Attracts the same for aidance 'gainst the enemy
Which with the heart there cools and ne'er returneth
To blush and beautify the cheek again.
But see, his face is black and full of blood,
His eye-balls further out than when he lived,
Staring full ghastly like a strangled man
His hair uprear'd, his nostrils stretched with struggling
His hands abroad display'd, as one that grasp'd
And tugg'd for life and was by strength subdued:
Look, on the sheets his hair you see, is sticking
His well-proportion'd beard made rough and rugged,
Like to the summer's corn by tempest lodged.
It cannot be but he was murder'd here
The least of all these signs were probable.
Why, Warwick, who should do the duke to death?
Myself and Beaufort had him in protection
And we, I hope, sir, are no murderers.
But both of you were vow'd Duke Humphrey's foes,
And you, forsooth, had the good duke to keep:
'Tis like you would not feast him like a friend
And 'tis well seen he found an enemy.
Then you, belike, suspect these noblemen
As guilty of Duke Humphrey's timeless death.
Who finds the heifer dead and bleeding fresh
And sees fast by a butcher with an axe,
But will suspect 'twas he that made the slaughter?
Who finds the partridge in the puttock's nest,
But may imagine how the bird was dead,
Although the kite soar with unbloodied beak?
Even so suspicious is this tragedy.
Are you the butcher, Suffolk? Where's your knife?
Is Beaufort term'd a kite? Where are his talons?
I wear no knife to slaughter sleeping men
But here's a vengeful sword, rusted with ease,
That shall be scoured in his rancorous heart
That slanders me with murder's crimson badge.
Say, if thou darest, proud Lord of Warwick-shire,
That I am faulty in Duke Humphrey's death.
Exeunt CARDINAL, SOMERSET, and others
What dares not Warwick, if false Suffolk dare him?
He dares not calm his contumelious spirit
Nor cease to be an arrogant controller,
Though Suffolk dare him twenty thousand times.
Madam, be still
For every word you speak in his behalf
Is slander to your royal dignity.
Blunt-witted lord, ignoble in demeanor!
If ever lady wrong'd her lord so much,
Thy mother took into her blameful bed
Some stern untutor'd churl, and noble stock
Was graft with crab-tree slip
And never of the Nevils' noble race.
But that the guilt of murder bucklers thee
And I should rob the deathsman of his fee,
Quitting thee thereby of ten thousand shames,
And that my sovereign's presence makes me mild,
I would, false murderous coward, on thy knee
Make thee beg pardon for thy passed speech,
And say it was thy mother that thou meant'st
That thou thyself was born in bastardy
And after all this fearful homage done,
Give thee thy hire and send thy soul to hell,
Pernicious blood-sucker of sleeping men!
Thou shall be waking well I shed thy blood,
If from this presence thou darest go with me.
Away even now, or I will drag thee hence:
Unworthy though thou art, I'll cope with thee
And do some service to Duke Humphrey's ghost.
Exeunt SUFFOLK and WARWICK
What stronger breastplate than a heart untainted!
Thrice is he armed that hath his quarrel just,
And he but naked, though lock'd up in steel
Whose conscience with injustice is corrupted.
A noise within
What noise is this?
Re-enter SUFFOLK and WARWICK, with their weapons drawn
Why, how now, lords! your wrathful weapons drawn
Here in our presence! dare you be so bold?
Why, what tumultuous clamour have we here?
The traitorous Warwick with the men of Bury
Set all upon me, mighty sovereign.
[To the Commons, entering]  Sirs, stand apart
the king shall know your mind.
Dread lord, the commons send you word by me,
Unless Lord Suffolk straight be done to death,
Or banished fair England's territories,
They will by violence tear him from your palace
And torture him with grievous lingering death.
They say, by him the good Duke Humphrey died
They say, in him they fear your highness' death
And mere instinct of love and loyalty,
Free from a stubborn opposite intent,
As being thought to contradict your liking,
Makes them thus forward in his banishment.
They say, in care of your most royal person,
That if your highness should intend to sleep
And charge that no man should disturb your rest
In pain of your dislike or pain of death,
Yet, notwithstanding such a strait edict,
Were there a serpent seen, with forked tongue,
That slily glided towards your majesty,
It were but necessary you were waked,
Lest, being suffer'd in that harmful slumber,
The mortal worm might make the sleep eternal
And therefore do they cry, though you forbid,
That they will guard you, whether you will or no,
From such fell serpents as false Suffolk is,
With whose envenomed and fatal sting,
Your loving uncle, twenty times his worth,
They say, is shamefully bereft of life.
[Within]  An answer from the king, my
Lord of Salisbury!
'Tis like the commons, rude unpolish'd hinds,
Could send such message to their sovereign:
But you, my lord, were glad to be employ'd,
To show how quaint an orator you are:
But all the honour Salisbury hath won
Is, that he was the lord ambassador
Sent from a sort of tinkers to the king.
[Within]  An answer from the king, or we will all break in!
Go, Salisbury, and tell them all from me.
I thank them for their tender loving care
And had I not been cited so by them,
Yet did I purpose as they do entreat
For, sure, my thoughts do hourly prophesy
Mischance unto my state by Suffolk's means:
And therefore, by His majesty I swear,
Whose far unworthy deputy I am,
He shall not breathe infection in this air
But three days longer, on the pain of death.
Exit SALISBURY
O Henry, let me plead for gentle Suffolk!
Ungentle queen, to call him gentle Suffolk!
No more, I say: if thou dost plead for him,
Thou wilt but add increase unto my wrath.
Had I but said, I would have kept my word,
But when I swear, it is irrevocable.
If, after three days' space, thou here be'st found
On any ground that I am ruler of,
The world shall not be ransom for thy life.
Come, Warwick, come, good Warwick, go with me
I have great matters to impart to thee.
Exeunt all but QUEEN MARGARET and SUFFOLK
Mischance and sorrow go along with you!
Heart's discontent and sour affliction
Be playfellows to keep you company!
There's two of you
And threefold vengeance tend upon your steps!
Cease, gentle queen, these execrations,
And let thy Suffolk take his heavy leave.
Fie, coward woman and soft-hearted wretch!
Hast thou not spirit to curse thine enemy?
A plague upon them! wherefore should I curse them?
Would curses kill, as doth the mandrake's groan,
I would invent as bitter-searching terms,
As curst, as harsh and horrible to hear,
Deliver'd strongly through my fixed teeth,
With full as many signs of deadly hate,
As lean-faced Envy in her loathsome cave:
My tongue should stumble in mine earnest words
Mine eyes should sparkle like the beaten flint
Mine hair be fixed on end, as one distract
Ay, every joint should seem to curse and ban:
And even now my burthen'd heart would break,
Should I not curse them. Poison be their drink!
Gall, worse than gall, the daintiest that they taste!
Their sweetest shade a grove of cypress trees!
Their chiefest prospect murdering basilisks!
Their softest touch as smart as lizards' sting!
Their music frightful as the serpent's hiss,
And boding screech-owls make the concert full!
All the foul terrors in dark-seated hell--
Enough, sweet Suffolk
And these dread curses, like the sun 'gainst glass,
Or like an overcharged gun, recoil,
And turn the force of them upon thyself.
You bade me ban, and will you bid me leave?
Now, by the ground that I am banish'd from,
Well could I curse away a winter's night,
Though standing naked on a mountain top,
Where biting cold would never let grass grow,
And think it but a minute spent in sport.
O, let me entreat thee cease. Give me thy hand,
That I may dew it with my mournful tears
Nor let the rain of heaven wet this place,
To wash away my woful monuments.
O, could this kiss be printed in thy hand,
That thou mightst think upon these by the seal,
Through whom a thousand sighs are breathed for thee!
So, get thee gone, that I may know my grief
'Tis but surmised whiles thou art standing by,
As one that surfeits thinking on a want.
I will repeal thee, or, be well assured,
Adventure to be banished myself:
And banished I am, if but from thee.
Go
O, go not yet! Even thus two friends condemn'd
Embrace and kiss and take ten thousand leaves,
Loather a hundred times to part than die.
Yet now farewell
Thus is poor Suffolk ten times banished
Once by the king, and three times thrice by thee.
'Tis not the land I care for, wert thou thence
A wilderness is populous enough,
So Suffolk had thy heavenly company:
For where thou art, there is the world itself,
With every several pleasure in the world,
And where thou art not, desolation.
I can no more: live thou to joy thy life
Myself no joy in nought but that thou livest.
Enter VAUX
Wither goes Vaux so fast? what news, I prithee?
To signify unto his majesty
That Cardinal Beaufort is at point of death
For suddenly a grievous sickness took him,
That makes him gasp and stare and catch the air,
Blaspheming God and cursing men on earth.
Sometimes he talks as if Duke Humphrey's ghost
Were by his side
And whispers to his pillow, as to him,
The secrets of his overcharged soul
And I am sent to tell his majesty
That even now he cries aloud for him.
Go tell this heavy message to the king.
Exit VAUX
Ay me! what is this world! what news are these!
But wherefore grieve I at an hour's poor loss,
Omitting Suffolk's exile, my soul's treasure?
Why only, Suffolk, mourn I not for thee,
And with the southern clouds contend in tears,
Theirs for the earth's increase, mine for my sorrows?
Now get thee hence: the king, thou know'st, is coming
If thou be found by me, thou art but dead.
If I depart from thee, I cannot live
And in thy sight to die, what were it else
But like a pleasant slumber in thy lap?
Here could I breathe my soul into the air,
As mild and gentle as the cradle-babe
Dying with mother's dug between its lips:
Where, from thy sight, I should be raging mad,
And cry out for thee to close up mine eyes,
To have thee with thy lips to stop my mouth
So shouldst thou either turn my flying soul,
Or I should breathe it so into thy body,
And then it lived in sweet Elysium.
To die by thee were but to die in jest
From thee to die were torture more than death:
O, let me stay, befall what may befall!
Away! though parting be a fretful corrosive,
It is applied to a deathful wound.
To France, sweet Suffolk: let me hear from thee
For wheresoe'er thou art in this world's globe,
I'll have an Iris that shall find thee out.
I go.
And take my heart with thee.
A jewel, lock'd into the wofull'st cask
That ever did contain a thing of worth.
Even as a splitted bark, so sunder we
This way fall I to death.
This way for me.
Exeunt severally
SCENE III. A bedchamber.
Enter the KING, SALISBURY, WARWICK, to the CARDINAL in bed
How fares my lord? speak, Beaufort, to
thy sovereign.
If thou be'st death, I'll give thee England's treasure,
Enough to purchase such another island,
So thou wilt let me live, and feel no pain.
Ah, what a sign it is of evil life,
Where death's approach is seen so terrible!
Beaufort, it is thy sovereign speaks to thee.
Bring me unto my trial when you will.
Died he not in his bed? where should he die?
Can I make men live, whether they will or no?
O, torture me no more! I will confess.
Alive again? then show me where he is:
I'll give a thousand pound to look upon him.
He hath no eyes, the dust hath blinded them.
Comb down his hair
Like lime-twigs set to catch my winged soul.
Give me some drink
Bring the strong poison that I bought of him.
O thou eternal Mover of the heavens.
Look with a gentle eye upon this wretch!
O, beat away the busy meddling fiend
That lays strong siege unto this wretch's soul.
And from his bosom purge this black despair!
See, how the pangs of death do make him grin!
Disturb him not
Peace to his soul, if God's good pleasure be!
Lord cardinal, if thou think'st on heaven's bliss,
Hold up thy hand, make signal of thy hope.
He dies, and makes no sign. O God, forgive him!
So bad a death argues a monstrous life.
Forbear to judge, for we are sinners all.
Close up his eyes and draw the curtain close
And let us all to meditation.
Exeunt
ACT IV
SCENE I. The coast of Kent.
Alarum. Fight at sea. Ordnance goes off. Enter a  Captain, a Master, a Master's-mate, WALTER WHITMORE, and others
The gaudy, blabbing and remorseful day
Is crept into the bosom of the sea
And now loud-howling wolves arouse the jades
That drag the tragic melancholy night
Who, with their drowsy, slow and flagging wings,
Clip dead men's graves and from their misty jaws
Breathe foul contagious darkness in the air.
Therefore bring forth the soldiers of our prize
For, whilst our pinnace anchors in the Downs,
Here shall they make their ransom on the sand,
Or with their blood stain this discolour'd shore.
Master, this prisoner freely give I thee
And thou that art his mate, make boot of this
The other, Walter Whitmore, is thy share.
What is my ransom, master? let me know.
A thousand crowns, or else lay down your head.
Master's-Mate	And so much shall you give, or off goes yours.
What, think you much to pay two thousand crowns,
And bear the name and port of gentlemen?
Cut both the villains' throats
The lives of those which we have lost in fight
Be counterpoised with such a petty sum!
I'll give it, sir
And so will I and write home for it straight.
I lost mine eye in laying the prize aboard,
And therefore to revenge it, shalt thou die
To SUFFOLK
And so should these, if I might have my will.
Be not so rash
Look on my George
Rate me at what thou wilt, thou shalt be paid.
And so am I
How now! why start'st thou? what, doth
death affright?
Thy name affrights me, in whose sound is death.
A cunning man did calculate my birth
And told me that by water I should die:
Yet let not this make thee be bloody-minded
Thy name is Gaultier, being rightly sounded.
Gaultier or Walter, which it is, I care not:
Never yet did base dishonour blur our name,
But with our sword we wiped away the blot
Therefore, when merchant-like I sell revenge,
Broke be my sword, my arms torn and defaced,
And I proclaim'd a coward through the world!
Stay, Whitmore
The Duke of Suffolk, William de la Pole.
The Duke of Suffolk muffled up in rags!
Ay, but these rags are no part of the duke:
Jove sometimes went disguised, and why not I?
But Jove was never slain, as thou shalt be.
Obscure and lowly swain, King Henry's blood,
The honourable blood of Lancaster,
Must not be shed by such a jaded groom.
Hast thou not kiss'd thy hand and held my stirrup?
Bare-headed plodded by my foot-cloth mule
And thought thee happy when I shook my head?
How often hast thou waited at my cup,
Fed from my trencher, kneel'd down at the board.
When I have feasted with Queen Margaret?
Remember it and let it make thee crest-fall'n,
Ay, and allay this thy abortive pride
How in our voiding lobby hast thou stood
And duly waited for my coming forth?
This hand of mine hath writ in thy behalf,
And therefore shall it charm thy riotous tongue.
Speak, captain, shall I stab the forlorn swain?
First let my words stab him, as he hath me.
Base slave, thy words are blunt and so art thou.
Convey him hence and on our longboat's side
Strike off his head.
Thou darest not, for thy own.
Yes, Pole.
Pole!
Pool! Sir Pool! lord!
Ay, kennel, puddle, sink
Troubles the silver spring where England drinks.
Now will I dam up this thy yawning mouth
For swallowing the treasure of the realm:
Thy lips that kiss'd the queen shall sweep the ground
And thou that smiledst at good Duke Humphrey's death,
Against the senseless winds shalt grin in vain,
Who in contempt shall hiss at thee again:
And wedded be thou to the hags of hell,
For daring to affy a mighty lord
Unto the daughter of a worthless king,
Having neither subject, wealth, nor diadem.
By devilish policy art thou grown great,
And, like ambitious Sylla, overgorged
With gobbets of thy mother's bleeding heart.
By thee Anjou and Maine were sold to France,
The false revolting Normans thorough thee
Disdain to call us lord, and Picardy
Hath slain their governors, surprised our forts,
And sent the ragged soldiers wounded home.
The princely Warwick, and the Nevils all,
Whose dreadful swords were never drawn in vain,
As hating thee, are rising up in arms:
And now the house of York, thrust from the crown
By shameful murder of a guiltless king
And lofty proud encroaching tyranny,
Burns with revenging fire
Advance our half-faced sun, striving to shine,
Under the which is writ 'Invitis nubibus.'
The commons here in Kent are up in arms:
And, to conclude, reproach and beggary
Is crept into the palace of our king.
And all by thee. Away! convey him hence.
O that I were a god, to shoot forth thunder
Upon these paltry, servile, abject drudges!
Small things make base men proud: this villain here,
Being captain of a pinnace, threatens more
Than Bargulus the strong Illyrian pirate.
Drones suck not eagles' blood but rob beehives:
It is impossible that I should die
By such a lowly vassal as thyself.
Thy words move rage and not remorse in me:
I go of message from the queen to France
I charge thee waft me safely cross the Channel.
Walter,--
Come, Suffolk, I must waft thee to thy death.
Gelidus timor occupat artus it is thee I fear.
Thou shalt have cause to fear before I leave thee.
What, are ye daunted now? now will ye stoop?
My gracious lord, entreat him, speak him fair.
Suffolk's imperial tongue is stern and rough,
Used to command, untaught to plead for favour.
Far be it we should honour such as these
With humble suit: no, rather let my head
Stoop to the block than these knees bow to any
Save to the God of heaven and to my king
And sooner dance upon a bloody pole
Than stand uncover'd to the vulgar groom.
True nobility is exempt from fear:
More can I bear than you dare execute.
Hale him away, and let him talk no more.
Come, soldiers, show what cruelty ye can,
That this my death may never be forgot!
Great men oft die by vile bezonians:
A Roman sworder and banditto slave
Murder'd sweet Tully
Stabb'd Julius Caesar
Pompey the Great
Exeunt Whitmore and others with Suffolk
And as for these whose ransom we have set,
It is our pleasure one of them depart
Therefore come you with us and let him go.
Exeunt all but the First Gentleman
Re-enter WHITMORE with SUFFOLK's body
There let his head and lifeless body lie,
Until the queen his mistress bury it.
Exit
O barbarous and bloody spectacle!
His body will I bear unto the king:
If he revenge it not, yet will his friends
So will the queen, that living held him dear.
Exit with the body
SCENE II. Blackheath.
Enter GEORGE BEVIS and JOHN HOLLAND
Come, and get thee a sword, though made of a lath
they have been up these two days.
They have the more need to sleep now, then.
I tell thee, Jack Cade the clothier means to dress
the commonwealth, and turn it, and set a new nap upon it.
So he had need, for 'tis threadbare. Well, I say it
was never merry world in England since gentlemen came up.
O miserable age! virtue is not regarded in handicrafts-men.
The nobility think scorn to go in leather aprons.
Nay, more, the king's council are no good workmen.
True
which is as much to say as, let the magistrates be
labouring men
magistrates.
Thou hast hit it
brave mind than a hard hand.
I see them! I see them! there's Best's son, the
tanner of Wingham,--
He shall have the skin of our enemies, to make
dog's-leather of.
And Dick the Butcher,--
Then is sin struck down like an ox, and iniquity's
throat cut like a calf.
And Smith the weaver,--
Argo, their thread of life is spun.
Come, come, let's fall in with them.
Drum. Enter CADE, DICK the Butcher, SMITH the Weaver, and a Sawyer, with infinite numbers
We John Cade, so termed of our supposed father,--
[Aside]  Or rather, of stealing a cade of herrings.
For our enemies shall fall before us, inspired with
the spirit of putting down kings and princes,
--Command silence.
Silence!
My father was a Mortimer,--
[Aside]  He was an honest man, and a good
bricklayer.
My mother a Plantagenet,--
[Aside]  I knew her well
My wife descended of the Lacies,--
[Aside]  She was, indeed, a pedler's daughter, and
sold many laces.
[Aside]  But now of late, notable to travel with her
furred pack, she washes bucks here at home.
Therefore am I of an honourable house.
[Aside]  Ay, by my faith, the field is honourable
and there was he borne, under a hedge, for his
father had never a house but the cage.
Valiant I am.
[Aside]  A' must needs
I am able to endure much.
[Aside]  No question of that
whipped three market-days together.
I fear neither sword nor fire.
[Aside]  He need not fear the sword
[Aside]  But methinks he should stand in fear of
fire, being burnt i' the hand for stealing of sheep.
Be brave, then
reformation. There shall be in England seven
halfpenny loaves sold for a penny: the three-hooped
pot
to drink small beer: all the realm shall be in
common
grass: and when I am king, as king I will be,--
God save your majesty!
I thank you, good people: there shall be no money
all shall eat and drink on my score
apparel them all in one livery, that they may agree
like brothers and worship me their lord.
The first thing we do, let's kill all the lawyers.
Nay, that I mean to do. Is not this a lamentable
thing, that of the skin of an innocent lamb should
be made parchment? that parchment, being scribbled
o'er, should undo a man? Some say the bee stings:
but I say, 'tis the bee's wax
once to a thing, and I was never mine own man
since. How now! who's there?
Enter some, bringing forward the Clerk of Chatham
The clerk of Chatham: he can write and read and
cast accompt.
O monstrous!
We took him setting of boys' copies.
Here's a villain!
Has a book in his pocket with red letters in't.
Nay, then, he is a conjurer.
Nay, he can make obligations, and write court-hand.
I am sorry for't: the man is a proper man, of mine
honour
Come hither, sirrah, I must examine thee: what is thy name?
Emmanuel.
They use to write it on the top of letters: 'twill
go hard with you.
Let me alone. Dost thou use to write thy name? or
hast thou a mark to thyself, like an honest
plain-dealing man?
Sir, I thank God, I have been so well brought up
that I can write my name.
He hath confessed: away with him! he's a villain
and a traitor.
Away with him, I say! hang him with his pen and
ink-horn about his neck.
Exit one with the Clerk
Enter MICHAEL
Where's our general?
Here I am, thou particular fellow.
Fly, fly, fly! Sir Humphrey Stafford and his
brother are hard by, with the king's forces.
Stand, villain, stand, or I'll fell thee down. He
shall be encountered with a man as good as himself:
he is but a knight, is a'?
No.
To equal him, I will make myself a knight presently.
Kneels
Rise up Sir John Mortimer.
Rises
Now have at him!
Enter SIR HUMPHREY and WILLIAM STAFFORD, with drum and soldiers
Rebellious hinds, the filth and scum of Kent,
Mark'd for the gallows, lay your weapons down
Home to your cottages, forsake this groom:
The king is merciful, if you revolt.
But angry, wrathful, and inclined to blood,
If you go forward
As for these silken-coated slaves, I pass not:
It is to you, good people, that I speak,
Over whom, in time to come, I hope to reign
For I am rightful heir unto the crown.
Villain, thy father was a plasterer
And thou thyself a shearman, art thou not?
And Adam was a gardener.
And what of that?
Marry, this: Edmund Mortimer, Earl of March.
Married the Duke of Clarence' daughter, did he not?
Ay, sir.
By her he had two children at one birth.
That's false.
Ay, there's the question
The elder of them, being put to nurse,
Was by a beggar-woman stolen away
And, ignorant of his birth and parentage,
Became a bricklayer when he came to age:
His son am I
Nay, 'tis too true
Sir, he made a chimney in my father's house, and
the bricks are alive at this day to testify it
therefore deny it not.
And will you credit this base drudge's words,
That speaks he knows not what?
Ay, marry, will we
Jack Cade, the Duke of York hath taught you this.
[Aside]  He lies, for I invented it myself.
Go to, sirrah, tell the king from me, that, for his
father's sake, Henry the Fifth, in whose time boys
went to span-counter for French crowns, I am content
he shall reign
And furthermore, well have the Lord Say's head for
selling the dukedom of Maine.
And good reason
fain to go with a staff, but that my puissance holds
it up. Fellow kings, I tell you that that Lord Say
hath gelded the commonwealth, and made it an eunuch:
and more than that, he can speak French
therefore he is a traitor.
O gross and miserable ignorance!
Nay, answer, if you can: the Frenchmen are our
enemies
speaks with the tongue of an enemy be a good
counsellor, or no?
No, no
Well, seeing gentle words will not prevail,
Assail them with the army of the king.
Herald, away
Proclaim them traitors that are up with Cade
That those which fly before the battle ends
May, even in their wives' and children's sight,
Be hang'd up for example at their doors:
And you that be the king's friends, follow me.
Exeunt WILLIAM STAFFORD and SIR HUMPHREY, and soldiers
And you that love the commons, follow me.
Now show yourselves men
We will not leave one lord, one gentleman:
Spare none but such as go in clouted shoon
For they are thrifty honest men, and such
As would, but that they dare not, take our parts.
They are all in order and march toward us.
But then are we in order when we are most
out of order. Come, march forward.
Exeunt
SCENE III. Another part of Blackheath.
Alarums to the fight, wherein SIR HUMPHREY and WILLIAM STAFFORD are slain. Enter CADE and the rest
Where's Dick, the butcher of Ashford?
Here, sir.
They fell before thee like sheep and oxen, and thou
behavedst thyself as if thou hadst been in thine own
slaughter-house: therefore thus will I reward thee,
the Lent shall be as long again as it is
shalt have a licence to kill for a hundred lacking
one.
I desire no more.
And, to speak truth, thou deservest no less. This
monument of the victory will I bear
Putting on SIR HUMPHREY'S brigandine
and the bodies shall be dragged at my horse' heels
till I do come to London, where we will have the
mayor's sword borne before us.
If we mean to thrive and do good, break open the
gaols and let out the prisoners.
Fear not that, I warrant thee. Come, let's march
towards London.
Exeunt
SCENE IV. London. The palace.
Enter KING HENRY VI with a supplication, and the QUEEN with SUFFOLK'S head, BUCKINGHAM and Lord SAY
Oft have I heard that grief softens the mind,
And makes it fearful and degenerate
Think therefore on revenge and cease to weep.
But who can cease to weep and look on this?
Here may his head lie on my throbbing breast:
But where's the body that I should embrace?
What answer makes your grace to the rebels'
supplication?
I'll send some holy bishop to entreat
For God forbid so many simple souls
Should perish by the sword! And I myself,
Rather than bloody war shall cut them short,
Will parley with Jack Cade their general:
But stay, I'll read it over once again.
Ah, barbarous villains! hath this lovely face
Ruled, like a wandering planet, over me,
And could it not enforce them to relent,
That were unworthy to behold the same?
Lord Say, Jack Cade hath sworn to have thy head.
Ay, but I hope your highness shall have his.
How now, madam!
Still lamenting and mourning for Suffolk's death?
I fear me, love, if that I had been dead,
Thou wouldst not have mourn'd so much for me.
No, my love, I should not mourn, but die for thee.
Enter a Messenger
How now! what news? why comest thou in such haste?
The rebels are in Southwark
Jack Cade proclaims himself Lord Mortimer,
Descended from the Duke of Clarence' house,
And calls your grace usurper openly
And vows to crown himself in Westminster.
His army is a ragged multitude
Of hinds and peasants, rude and merciless:
Sir Humphrey Stafford and h is brother's death
Hath given them heart and courage to proceed:
All scholars, lawyers, courtiers, gentlemen,
They call false caterpillars, and intend their death.
O graceless men! they know not what they do.
My gracious lord, return to Killingworth,
Until a power be raised to put them down.
Ah, were the Duke of Suffolk now alive,
These Kentish rebels would be soon appeased!
Lord Say, the traitors hate thee
Therefore away with us to Killingworth.
So might your grace's person be in danger.
The sight of me is odious in their eyes
And therefore in this city will I stay
And live alone as secret as I may.
Enter another Messenger
Jack Cade hath gotten London bridge:
The citizens fly and forsake their houses:
The rascal people, thirsting after prey,
Join with the traitor, and they jointly swear
To spoil the city and your royal court.
Then linger not, my lord, away, take horse.
Come, Margaret
My hope is gone, now Suffolk is deceased.
Farewell, my lord: trust not the Kentish rebels.
Trust nobody, for fear you be betray'd.
The trust I have is in mine innocence,
And therefore am I bold and resolute.
Exeunt
SCENE V. London. The Tower.
Enter SCALES upon the Tower, walking. Then enter two or three Citizens below
How now! is Jack Cade slain?
No, my lord, nor likely to be slain
won the bridge, killing all those that withstand
them: the lord mayor craves aid of your honour from
the Tower, to defend the city from the rebels.
Such aid as I can spare you shall command
But I am troubled here with them myself
The rebels have assay'd to win the Tower.
But get you to Smithfield, and gather head,
And thither I will send you Matthew Goffe
Fight for your king, your country and your lives
And so, farewell, for I must hence again.
Exeunt
SCENE VI. London. Cannon Street.
Enter CADE and the rest, and strikes his staff on London-stone
Now is Mortimer lord of this city. And here, sitting
upon London-stone, I charge and command that, of the
city's cost, the pissing-conduit run nothing but
claret wine this first year of our reign. And now
henceforward it shall be treason for any that calls
me other than Lord Mortimer.
Enter a Soldier, running
Jack Cade! Jack Cade!
Knock him down there.
They kill him
If this fellow be wise, he'll never call ye Jack
Cade more: I think he hath a very fair warning.
My lord, there's an army gathered together in
Smithfield.
Come, then, let's go fight with them
and set London bridge on fire
down the Tower too. Come, let's away.
Exeunt
SCENE VII. London. Smithfield.
Alarums. MATTHEW GOFFE is slain, and all the rest. Then enter CADE, with his company.
So, sirs: now go some and pull down the Savoy
others to the inns of court
I have a suit unto your lordship.
Be it a lordship, thou shalt have it for that word.
Only that the laws of England may come out of your mouth.
[Aside]  Mass, 'twill be sore law, then
thrust in the mouth with a spear, and 'tis not whole
yet.
[Aside]  Nay, John, it will be stinking law for his
breath stinks with eating toasted cheese.
I have thought upon it, it shall be so. Away, burn
all the records of the realm: my mouth shall be
the parliament of England.
[Aside]  Then we are like to have biting statutes,
unless his teeth be pulled out.
And henceforward all things shall be in common.
Enter a Messenger
My lord, a prize, a prize! here's the Lord Say,
which sold the towns in France
one and twenty fifteens, and one shilling to the
pound, the last subsidy.
Enter BEVIS, with Lord SAY
Well, he shall be beheaded for it ten times. Ah,
thou say, thou serge, nay, thou buckram lord! now
art thou within point-blank of our jurisdiction
regal. What canst thou answer to my majesty for
giving up of Normandy unto Mounsieur Basimecu, the
dauphin of France? Be it known unto thee by these
presence, even the presence of Lord Mortimer, that I
am the besom that must sweep the court clean of such
filth as thou art. Thou hast most traitorously
corrupted the youth of the realm in erecting a
grammar school
had no other books but the score and the tally, thou
hast caused printing to be used, and, contrary to
the king, his crown and dignity, thou hast built a
paper-mill. It will be proved to thy face that thou
hast men about thee that usually talk of a noun and
a verb, and such abominable words as no Christian
ear can endure to hear. Thou hast appointed
justices of peace, to call poor men before them
about matters they were not able to answer.
Moreover, thou hast put them in prison
they could not read, thou hast hanged them
indeed, only for that cause they have been most
worthy to live. Thou dost ride in a foot-cloth, dost thou not?
What of that?
Marry, thou oughtest not to let thy horse wear a
cloak, when honester men than thou go in their hose
and doublets.
And work in their shirt too
that am a butcher.
You men of Kent,--
What say you of Kent?
Nothing but this
Away with him, away with him! he speaks Latin.
Hear me but speak, and bear me where you will.
Kent, in the Commentaries Caesar writ,
Is term'd the civil'st place of this isle:
Sweet is the country, because full of riches
The people liberal, valiant, active, wealthy
Which makes me hope you are not void of pity.
I sold not Maine, I lost not Normandy,
Yet, to recover them, would lose my life.
Justice with favour have I always done
Prayers and tears have moved me, gifts could never.
When have I aught exacted at your hands,
But to maintain the king, the realm and you?
Large gifts have I bestow'd on learned clerks,
Because my book preferr'd me to the king,
And seeing ignorance is the curse of God,
Knowledge the wing wherewith we fly to heaven,
Unless you be possess'd with devilish spirits,
You cannot but forbear to murder me:
This tongue hath parley'd unto foreign kings
For your behoof,--
Tut, when struck'st thou one blow in the field?
Great men have reaching hands: oft have I struck
Those that I never saw and struck them dead.
O monstrous coward! what, to come behind folks?
These cheeks are pale for watching for your good.
Give him a box o' the ear and that will make 'em red again.
Long sitting to determine poor men's causes
Hath made me full of sickness and diseases.
Ye shall have a hempen caudle, then, and the help of hatchet.
Why dost thou quiver, man?
The palsy, and not fear, provokes me.
Nay, he nods at us, as who should say, I'll be even
with you: I'll see if his head will stand steadier
on a pole, or no. Take him away, and behead him.
Tell me wherein have I offended most?
Have I affected wealth or honour? speak.
Are my chests fill'd up with extorted gold?
Is my apparel sumptuous to behold?
Whom have I injured, that ye seek my death?
These hands are free from guiltless bloodshedding,
This breast from harbouring foul deceitful thoughts.
O, let me live!
[Aside]  I feel remorse in myself with his words
but I'll bridle it: he shall die, an it be but for
pleading so well for his life. Away with him! he
has a familiar under his tongue
God's name. Go, take him away, I say, and strike
off his head presently
son-in-law's house, Sir James Cromer, and strike off
his head, and bring them both upon two poles hither.
It shall be done.
Ah, countrymen! if when you make your prayers,
God should be so obdurate as yourselves,
How would it fare with your departed souls?
And therefore yet relent, and save my life.
Away with him! and do as I command ye.
Exeunt some with Lord SAY
The proudest peer in the realm shall not wear a head
on his shoulders, unless he pay me tribute
shall not a maid be married, but she shall pay to me
her maidenhead ere they have it: men shall hold of
me in capite
wives be as free as heart can wish or tongue can tell.
My lord, when shall we go to Cheapside and take up
commodities upon our bills?
Marry, presently.
O, brave!
Re-enter one with the heads
But is not this braver? Let them kiss one another,
for they loved well when they were alive. Now part
them again, lest they consult about the giving up of
some more towns in France. Soldiers, defer the
spoil of the city until night: for with these borne
before us, instead of maces, will we ride through
the streets, and at every corner have them kiss. Away!
Exeunt
SCENE VIII. Southwark.
Alarum and retreat. Enter CADE and all his rabblement
Up Fish Street! down Saint Magnus' Corner! Kill
and knock down! throw them into Thames!
Sound a parley
What noise is this I hear? Dare any be so bold to
sound retreat or parley, when I command them kill?
Enter BUCKINGHAM and CLIFFORD, attended
Ay, here they be that dare and will disturb thee:
Know, Cade, we come ambassadors from the king
Unto the commons whom thou hast misled
And here pronounce free pardon to them all
That will forsake thee and go home in peace.
What say ye, countrymen? will ye relent,
And yield to mercy whilst 'tis offer'd you
Or let a rebel lead you to your deaths?
Who loves the king and will embrace his pardon,
Fling up his cap, and say 'God save his majesty!'
Who hateth him and honours not his father,
Henry the Fifth, that made all France to quake,
Shake he his weapon at us and pass by.
God save the king! God save the king!
What, Buckingham and Clifford, are ye so brave? And
you, base peasants, do ye believe him? will you
needs be hanged with your pardons about your necks?
Hath my sword therefore broke through London gates,
that you should leave me at the White Hart in
Southwark? I thought ye would never have given out
these arms till you had recovered your ancient
freedom: but you are all recreants and dastards,
and delight to live in slavery to the nobility. Let
them break your backs with burthens, take your
houses over your heads, ravish your wives and
daughters before your faces: for me, I will make
shift for one
all!
We'll follow Cade, we'll follow Cade!
Is Cade the son of Henry the Fifth,
That thus you do exclaim you'll go with him?
Will he conduct you through the heart of France,
And make the meanest of you earls and dukes?
Alas, he hath no home, no place to fly to
Nor knows he how to live but by the spoil,
Unless by robbing of your friends and us.
Were't not a shame, that whilst you live at jar,
The fearful French, whom you late vanquished,
Should make a start o'er seas and vanquish you?
Methinks already in this civil broil
I see them lording it in London streets,
Crying 'Villiago!' unto all they meet.
Better ten thousand base-born Cades miscarry
Than you should stoop unto a Frenchman's mercy.
To France, to France, and get what you have lost
Spare England, for it is your native coast
Henry hath money, you are strong and manly
God on our side, doubt not of victory.
A Clifford! a Clifford! we'll follow the king and Clifford.
Was ever feather so lightly blown to and fro as this
multitude? The name of Henry the Fifth hales them
to an hundred mischiefs, and makes them leave me
desolate. I see them lay their heads together to
surprise me. My sword make way for me, for here is
no staying. In despite of the devils and hell, have
through the very middest of you? and heavens and
honour be witness, that no want of resolution in me.
but only my followers' base and ignominious
treasons, makes me betake me to my heels.
Exit
What, is he fled? Go some, and follow him
And he that brings his head unto the king
Shall have a thousand crowns for his reward.
Exeunt some of them
Follow me, soldiers: we'll devise a mean
To reconcile you all unto the king.
Exeunt
SCENE IX. Kenilworth Castle.
Sound Trumpets. Enter KING HENRY VI, QUEEN MARGARET, and SOMERSET, on the terrace
Was ever king that joy'd an earthly throne,
And could command no more content than I?
No sooner was I crept out of my cradle
But I was made a king, at nine months old.
Was never subject long'd to be a king
As I do long and wish to be a subject.
Enter BUCKINGHAM and CLIFFORD
Health and glad tidings to your majesty!
Why, Buckingham, is the traitor Cade surprised?
Or is he but retired to make him strong?
Enter below, multitudes, with halters about their necks
He is fled, my lord, and all his powers do yield
And humbly thus, with halters on their necks,
Expect your highness' doom of life or death.
Then, heaven, set ope thy everlasting gates,
To entertain my vows of thanks and praise!
Soldiers, this day have you redeemed your lives,
And show'd how well you love your prince and country:
Continue still in this so good a mind,
And Henry, though he be infortunate,
Assure yourselves, will never be unkind:
And so, with thanks and pardon to you all,
I do dismiss you to your several countries.
God save the king! God save the king!
Enter a Messenger
Please it your grace to be advertised
The Duke of York is newly come from Ireland,
And with a puissant and a mighty power
Of gallowglasses and stout kerns
Is marching hitherward in proud array,
And still proclaimeth, as he comes along,
His arms are only to remove from thee
The Duke of Somerset, whom he terms traitor.
Thus stands my state, 'twixt Cade and York distress'd.
Like to a ship that, having 'scaped a tempest,
Is straightway calm'd and boarded with a pirate:
But now is Cade driven back, his men dispersed
And now is York in arms to second him.
I pray thee, Buckingham, go and meet him,
And ask him what's the reason of these arms.
Tell him I'll send Duke Edmund to the Tower
And, Somerset, we'll commit thee thither,
Until his army be dismiss'd from him.
My lord,
I'll yield myself to prison willingly,
Or unto death, to do my country good.
In any case, be not too rough in terms
For he is fierce and cannot brook hard language.
I will, my lord
As all things shall redound unto your good.
Come, wife, let's in, and learn to govern better
For yet may England curse my wretched reign.
Flourish. Exeunt
SCENE X. Kent. IDEN's garden.
Enter CADE
Fie on ambition! fie on myself, that have a sword,
and yet am ready to famish! These five days have I
hid me in these woods and durst not peep out, for
all the country is laid for me
hungry that if I might have a lease of my life for a
thousand years I could stay no longer. Wherefore,
on a brick wall have I climbed into this garden, to
see if I can eat grass, or pick a sallet another
while, which is not amiss to cool a man's stomach
this hot weather. And I think this word 'sallet'
was born to do me good: for many a time, but for a
sallet, my brainpan had been cleft with a brown
bill
bravely marching, it hath served me instead of a
quart pot to drink in
must serve me to feed on.
Enter IDEN
Lord, who would live turmoiled in the court,
And may enjoy such quiet walks as these?
This small inheritance my father left me
Contenteth me, and worth a monarchy.
I seek not to wax great by others' waning,
Or gather wealth, I care not, with what envy:
Sufficeth that I have maintains my state
And sends the poor well pleased from my gate.
Here's the lord of the soil come to seize me for a
stray, for entering his fee-simple without leave.
Ah, villain, thou wilt betray me, and get a thousand
crowns of the king carrying my head to him: but
I'll make thee eat iron like an ostrich, and swallow
my sword like a great pin, ere thou and I part.
Why, rude companion, whatsoe'er thou be,
I know thee not
Is't not enough to break into my garden,
And, like a thief, to come to rob my grounds,
Climbing my walls in spite of me the owner,
But thou wilt brave me with these saucy terms?
Brave thee! ay, by the best blood that ever was
broached, and beard thee too. Look on me well: I
have eat no meat these five days
thy five men, and if I do not leave you all as dead
as a doornail, I pray God I may never eat grass more.
Nay, it shall ne'er be said, while England stands,
That Alexander Iden, an esquire of Kent,
Took odds to combat a poor famish'd man.
Oppose thy steadfast-gazing eyes to mine,
See if thou canst outface me with thy looks:
Set limb to limb, and thou art far the lesser
Thy hand is but a finger to my fist,
Thy leg a stick compared with this truncheon
My foot shall fight with all the strength thou hast
And if mine arm be heaved in the air,
Thy grave is digg'd already in the earth.
As for words, whose greatness answers words,
Let this my sword report what speech forbears.
By my valour, the most complete champion that ever I
heard! Steel, if thou turn the edge, or cut not out
the burly-boned clown in chines of beef ere thou
sleep in thy sheath, I beseech God on my knees thou
mayst be turned to hobnails.
Here they fight. CADE falls
O, I am slain! famine and no other hath slain me:
let ten thousand devils come against me, and give me
but the ten meals I have lost, and I'll defy them
all. Wither, garden
burying-place to all that do dwell in this house,
because the unconquered soul of Cade is fled.
Is't Cade that I have slain, that monstrous traitor?
Sword, I will hollow thee for this thy deed,
And hang thee o'er my tomb when I am dead:
Ne'er shall this blood be wiped from thy point
But thou shalt wear it as a herald's coat,
To emblaze the honour that thy master got.
Iden, farewell, and be proud of thy victory. Tell
Kent from me, she hath lost her best man, and exhort
all the world to be cowards
feared any, am vanquished by famine, not by valour.
Dies
How much thou wrong'st me, heaven be my judge.
Die, damned wretch, the curse of her that bare thee
And as I thrust thy body in with my sword,
So wish I, I might thrust thy soul to hell.
Hence will I drag thee headlong by the heels
Unto a dunghill which shall be thy grave,
And there cut off thy most ungracious head
Which I will bear in triumph to the king,
Leaving thy trunk for crows to feed upon.
Exit
ACT V
SCENE I. Fields between Dartford and Blackheath.
Enter YORK, and his army of Irish, with drum and colours
From Ireland thus comes York to claim his right,
And pluck the crown from feeble Henry's head:
Ring, bells, aloud
To entertain great England's lawful king.
Ah! sancta majestas, who would not buy thee dear?
Let them obey that know not how to rule
This hand was made to handle naught but gold.
I cannot give due action to my words,
Except a sword or sceptre balance it:
A sceptre shall it have, have I a soul,
On which I'll toss the flower-de-luce of France.
Enter BUCKINGHAM
Whom have we here? Buckingham, to disturb me?
The king hath sent him, sure: I must dissemble.
York, if thou meanest well, I greet thee well.
Humphrey of Buckingham, I accept thy greeting.
Art thou a messenger, or come of pleasure?
A messenger from Henry, our dread liege,
To know the reason of these arms in peace
Or why thou, being a subject as I am,
Against thy oath and true allegiance sworn,
Should raise so great a power without his leave,
Or dare to bring thy force so near the court.
[Aside]  Scarce can I speak, my choler is so great:
O, I could hew up rocks and fight with flint,
I am so angry at these abject terms
And now, like Ajax Telamonius,
On sheep or oxen could I spend my fury.
I am far better born than is the king,
More like a king, more kingly in my thoughts:
But I must make fair weather yet a while,
Till Henry be more weak and I more strong,--
Buckingham, I prithee, pardon me,
That I have given no answer all this while
My mind was troubled with deep melancholy.
The cause why I have brought this army hither
Is to remove proud Somerset from the king,
Seditious to his grace and to the state.
That is too much presumption on thy part:
But if thy arms be to no other end,
The king hath yielded unto thy demand:
The Duke of Somerset is in the Tower.
Upon thine honour, is he prisoner?
Upon mine honour, he is prisoner.
Then, Buckingham, I do dismiss my powers.
Soldiers, I thank you all
Meet me to-morrow in St. George's field,
You shall have pay and every thing you wish.
And let my sovereign, virtuous Henry,
Command my eldest son, nay, all my sons,
As pledges of my fealty and love
I'll send them all as willing as I live:
Lands, goods, horse, armour, any thing I have,
Is his to use, so Somerset may die.
York, I commend this kind submission:
We twain will go into his highness' tent.
Enter KING HENRY VI and Attendants
Buckingham, doth York intend no harm to us,
That thus he marcheth with thee arm in arm?
In all submission and humility
York doth present himself unto your highness.
Then what intends these forces thou dost bring?
To heave the traitor Somerset from hence,
And fight against that monstrous rebel Cade,
Who since I heard to be discomfited.
Enter IDEN, with CADE'S head
If one so rude and of so mean condition
May pass into the presence of a king,
Lo, I present your grace a traitor's head,
The head of Cade, whom I in combat slew.
The head of Cade! Great God, how just art Thou!
O, let me view his visage, being dead,
That living wrought me such exceeding trouble.
Tell me, my friend, art thou the man that slew him?
I was, an't like your majesty.
How art thou call'd? and what is thy degree?
Alexander Iden, that's my name
A poor esquire of Kent, that loves his king.
So please it you, my lord, 'twere not amiss
He were created knight for his good service.
Iden, kneel down.
He kneels
Rise up a knight.
We give thee for reward a thousand marks,
And will that thou henceforth attend on us.
May Iden live to merit such a bounty.
And never live but true unto his liege!
Rises
Enter QUEEN MARGARET and SOMERSET
See, Buckingham, Somerset comes with the queen:
Go, bid her hide him quickly from the duke.
For thousand Yorks he shall not hide his head,
But boldly stand and front him to his face.
How now! is Somerset at liberty?
Then, York, unloose thy long-imprison'd thoughts,
And let thy tongue be equal with thy heart.
Shall I endure the sight of Somerset?
False king! why hast thou broken faith with me,
Knowing how hardly I can brook abuse?
King did I call thee? no, thou art not king,
Not fit to govern and rule multitudes,
Which darest not, no, nor canst not rule a traitor.
That head of thine doth not become a crown
Thy hand is made to grasp a palmer's staff,
And not to grace an awful princely sceptre.
That gold must round engirt these brows of mine,
Whose smile and frown, like to Achilles' spear,
Is able with the change to kill and cure.
Here is a hand to hold a sceptre up
And with the same to act controlling laws.
Give place: by heaven, thou shalt rule no more
O'er him whom heaven created for thy ruler.
O monstrous traitor! I arrest thee, York,
Of capital treason 'gainst the king and crown
Obey, audacious traitor
Wouldst have me kneel? first let me ask of these,
If they can brook I bow a knee to man.
Sirrah, call in my sons to be my bail
Exit Attendant
I know, ere they will have me go to ward,
They'll pawn their swords for my enfranchisement.
Call hither Clifford! bid him come amain,
To say if that the bastard boys of York
Shall be the surety for their traitor father.
Exit BUCKINGHAM
O blood-besotted Neapolitan,
Outcast of Naples, England's bloody scourge!
The sons of York, thy betters in their birth,
Shall be their father's bail
That for my surety will refuse the boys!
Enter EDWARD and RICHARD
See where they come: I'll warrant they'll
make it good.
Enter CLIFFORD and YOUNG CLIFFORD
And here comes Clifford to deny their bail.
Health and all happiness to my lord the king!
Kneels
I thank thee, Clifford: say, what news with thee?
Nay, do not fright us with an angry look
We are thy sovereign, Clifford, kneel again
For thy mistaking so, we pardon thee.
This is my king, York, I do not mistake
But thou mistakest me much to think I do:
To Bedlam with him! is the man grown mad?
Ay, Clifford
Makes him oppose himself against his king.
He is a traitor
And chop away that factious pate of his.
He is arrested, but will not obey
His sons, he says, shall give their words for him.
Will you not, sons?
Ay, noble father, if our words will serve.
And if words will not, then our weapons shall.
Why, what a brood of traitors have we here!
Look in a glass, and call thy image so:
I am thy king, and thou a false-heart traitor.
Call hither to the stake my two brave bears,
That with the very shaking of their chains
They may astonish these fell-lurking curs:
Bid Salisbury and Warwick come to me.
Enter the WARWICK and SALISBURY
Are these thy bears? we'll bait thy bears to death.
And manacle the bear-ward in their chains,
If thou darest bring them to the baiting place.
Oft have I seen a hot o'erweening cur
Run back and bite, because he was withheld
Who, being suffer'd with the bear's fell paw,
Hath clapp'd his tail between his legs and cried:
And such a piece of service will you do,
If you oppose yourselves to match Lord Warwick.
Hence, heap of wrath, foul indigested lump,
As crooked in thy manners as thy shape!
Nay, we shall heat you thoroughly anon.
Take heed, lest by your heat you burn yourselves.
Why, Warwick, hath thy knee forgot to bow?
Old Salisbury, shame to thy silver hair,
Thou mad misleader of thy brain-sick son!
What, wilt thou on thy death-bed play the ruffian,
And seek for sorrow with thy spectacles?
O, where is faith? O, where is loyalty?
If it be banish'd from the frosty head,
Where shall it find a harbour in the earth?
Wilt thou go dig a grave to find out war,
And shame thine honourable age with blood?
Why art thou old, and want'st experience?
Or wherefore dost abuse it, if thou hast it?
For shame! in duty bend thy knee to me
That bows unto the grave with mickle age.
My lord, I have consider'd with myself
The title of this most renowned duke
And in my conscience do repute his grace
The rightful heir to England's royal seat.
Hast thou not sworn allegiance unto me?
I have.
Canst thou dispense with heaven for such an oath?
It is great sin to swear unto a sin,
But greater sin to keep a sinful oath.
Who can be bound by any solemn vow
To do a murderous deed, to rob a man,
To force a spotless virgin's chastity,
To reave the orphan of his patrimony,
To wring the widow from her custom'd right,
And have no other reason for this wrong
But that he was bound by a solemn oath?
A subtle traitor needs no sophister.
Call Buckingham, and bid him arm himself.
Call Buckingham, and all the friends thou hast,
I am resolved for death or dignity.
The first I warrant thee, if dreams prove true.
You were best to go to bed and dream again,
To keep thee from the tempest of the field.
I am resolved to bear a greater storm
Than any thou canst conjure up to-day
And that I'll write upon thy burgonet,
Might I but know thee by thy household badge.
Now, by my father's badge, old Nevil's crest,
The rampant bear chain'd to the ragged staff,
This day I'll wear aloft my burgonet,
As on a mountain top the cedar shows
That keeps his leaves in spite of any storm,
Even to affright thee with the view thereof.
And from thy burgonet I'll rend thy bear
And tread it under foot with all contempt,
Despite the bear-ward that protects the bear.
And so to arms, victorious father,
To quell the rebels and their complices.
Fie! charity, for shame! speak not in spite,
For you shall sup with Jesu Christ to-night.
Foul stigmatic, that's more than thou canst tell.
If not in heaven, you'll surely sup in hell.
Exeunt severally
SCENE II. Saint Alban's.
Alarums to the battle. Enter WARWICK
Clifford of Cumberland, 'tis Warwick calls:
And if thou dost not hide thee from the bear,
Now, when the angry trumpet sounds alarum
And dead men's cries do fill the empty air,
Clifford, I say, come forth and fight with me:
Proud northern lord, Clifford of Cumberland,
Warwick is hoarse with calling thee to arms.
Enter YORK
How now, my noble lord? what, all afoot?
The deadly-handed Clifford slew my steed,
But match to match I have encounter'd him
And made a prey for carrion kites and crows
Even of the bonny beast he loved so well.
Enter CLIFFORD
Of one or both of us the time is come.
Hold, Warwick, seek thee out some other chase,
For I myself must hunt this deer to death.
Then, nobly, York
As I intend, Clifford, to thrive to-day,
It grieves my soul to leave thee unassail'd.
Exit
What seest thou in me, York? why dost thou pause?
With thy brave bearing should I be in love,
But that thou art so fast mine enemy.
Nor should thy prowess want praise and esteem,
But that 'tis shown ignobly and in treason.
So let it help me now against thy sword
As I in justice and true right express it.
My soul and body on the action both!
A dreadful lay! Address thee instantly.
They fight, and CLIFFORD falls
La fin couronne les oeuvres.
Dies
Thus war hath given thee peace, for thou art still.
Peace with his soul, heaven, if it be thy will!
Exit
Enter YOUNG CLIFFORD
Shame and confusion! all is on the rout
Fear frames disorder, and disorder wounds
Where it should guard. O war, thou son of hell,
Whom angry heavens do make their minister
Throw in the frozen bosoms of our part
Hot coals of vengeance! Let no soldier fly.
He that is truly dedicate to war
Hath no self-love, nor he that loves himself
Hath not essentially but by circumstance
The name of valour.
Seeing his dead father
O, let the vile world end,
And the premised flames of the last day
Knit earth and heaven together!
Now let the general trumpet blow his blast,
Particularities and petty sounds
To cease! Wast thou ordain'd, dear father,
To lose thy youth in peace, and to achieve
The silver livery of advised age,
And, in thy reverence and thy chair-days, thus
To die in ruffian battle? Even at this sight
My heart is turn'd to stone: and while 'tis mine,
It shall be stony. York not our old men spares
No more will I their babes: tears virginal
Shall be to me even as the dew to fire,
And beauty that the tyrant oft reclaims
Shall to my flaming wrath be oil and flax.
Henceforth I will not have to do with pity:
Meet I an infant of the house of York,
Into as many gobbets will I cut it
As wild Medea young Absyrtus did:
In cruelty will I seek out my fame.
Come, thou new ruin of old Clifford's house:
As did AEneas old Anchises bear,
So bear I thee upon my manly shoulders
But then AEneas bare a living load,
Nothing so heavy as these woes of mine.
Exit, bearing off his father
Enter RICHARD and SOMERSET to fight. SOMERSET is killed
So, lie thou there
For underneath an alehouse' paltry sign,
The Castle in Saint Alban's, Somerset
Hath made the wizard famous in his death.
Sword, hold thy temper
Priests pray for enemies, but princes kill.
Exit
Fight: excursions. Enter KING HENRY VI, QUEEN MARGARET, and others
Away, my lord! you are slow
Can we outrun the heavens? good Margaret, stay.
What are you made of? you'll nor fight nor fly:
Now is it manhood, wisdom and defence,
To give the enemy way, and to secure us
By what we can, which can no more but fly.
Alarum afar off
If you be ta'en, we then should see the bottom
Of all our fortunes: but if we haply scape,
As well we may, if not through your neglect,
We shall to London get, where you are loved
And where this breach now in our fortunes made
May readily be stopp'd.
Re-enter YOUNG CLIFFORD
But that my heart's on future mischief set,
I would speak blasphemy ere bid you fly:
But fly you must
Reigns in the hearts of all our present parts.
Away, for your relief! and we will live
To see their day and them our fortune give:
Away, my lord, away!
Exeunt
SCENE III. Fields near St. Alban's.
Alarum. Retreat. Enter YORK, RICHARD, WARWICK, and Soldiers, with drum and colours
Of Salisbury, who can report of him,
That winter lion, who in rage forgets
Aged contusions and all brush of time,
And, like a gallant in the brow of youth,
Repairs him with occasion? This happy day
Is not itself, nor have we won one foot,
If Salisbury be lost.
My noble father,
Three times to-day I holp him to his horse,
Three times bestrid him
Persuaded him from any further act:
But still, where danger was, still there I met him
And like rich hangings in a homely house,
So was his will in his old feeble body.
But, noble as he is, look where he comes.
Enter SALISBURY
Now, by my sword, well hast thou fought to-day
By the mass, so did we all. I thank you, Richard:
God knows how long it is I have to live
And it hath pleased him that three times to-day
You have defended me from imminent death.
Well, lords, we have not got that which we have:
'Tis not enough our foes are this time fled,
Being opposites of such repairing nature.
I know our safety is to follow them
For, as I hear, the king is fled to London,
To call a present court of parliament.
Let us pursue him ere the writs go forth.
What says Lord Warwick? shall we after them?
After them! nay, before them, if we can.
Now, by my faith, lords, 'twas a glorious day:
Saint Alban's battle won by famous York
Shall be eternized in all age to come.
Sound drums and trumpets, and to London all:
And more such days as these to us befall!
Exeunt
ACT I
SCENE I. London. The Parliament-house.
Alarum. Enter YORK, EDWARD, RICHARD, NORFOLK, MONTAGUE, WARWICK, and Soldiers
I wonder how the king escaped our hands.
While we pursued the horsemen of the north,
He slily stole away and left his men:
Whereat the great Lord of Northumberland,
Whose warlike ears could never brook retreat,
Cheer'd up the drooping army
Lord Clifford and Lord Stafford, all abreast,
Charged our main battle's front, and breaking in
Were by the swords of common soldiers slain.
Lord Stafford's father, Duke of Buckingham,
Is either slain or wounded dangerously
I cleft his beaver with a downright blow:
That this is true, father, behold his blood.
And, brother, here's the Earl of Wiltshire's blood,
Whom I encounter'd as the battles join'd.
Speak thou for me and tell them what I did.
Throwing down SOMERSET's head
Richard hath best deserved of all my sons.
But is your grace dead, my Lord of Somerset?
Such hope have all the line of John of Gaunt!
Thus do I hope to shake King Henry's head.
And so do I. Victorious Prince of York,
Before I see thee seated in that throne
Which now the house of Lancaster usurps,
I vow by heaven these eyes shall never close.
This is the palace of the fearful king,
And this the regal seat: possess it, York
For this is thine and not King Henry's heirs'
Assist me, then, sweet Warwick, and I will
For hither we have broken in by force.
We'll all assist you
Thanks, gentle Norfolk: stay by me, my lords
And, soldiers, stay and lodge by me this night.
They go up
And when the king comes, offer no violence,
Unless he seek to thrust you out perforce.
The queen this day here holds her parliament,
But little thinks we shall be of her council:
By words or blows here let us win our right.
Arm'd as we are, let's stay within this house.
The bloody parliament shall this be call'd,
Unless Plantagenet, Duke of York, be king,
And bashful Henry deposed, whose cowardice
Hath made us by-words to our enemies.
Then leave me not, my lords
I mean to take possession of my right.
Neither the king, nor he that loves him best,
The proudest he that holds up Lancaster,
Dares stir a wing, if Warwick shake his bells.
I'll plant Plantagenet, root him up who dares:
Resolve thee, Richard
Flourish. Enter KING HENRY VI, CLIFFORD, NORTHUMBERLAND, WESTMORELAND, EXETER, and the rest
My lords, look where the sturdy rebel sits,
Even in the chair of state: belike he means,
Back'd by the power of Warwick, that false peer,
To aspire unto the crown and reign as king.
Earl of Northumberland, he slew thy father.
And thine, Lord Clifford
On him, his sons, his favourites and his friends.
If I be not, heavens be revenged on me!
The hope thereof makes Clifford mourn in steel.
What, shall we suffer this? let's pluck him down:
My heart for anger burns
Be patient, gentle Earl of Westmoreland.
Patience is for poltroons, such as he:
He durst not sit there, had your father lived.
My gracious lord, here in the parliament
Let us assail the family of York.
Well hast thou spoken, cousin: be it so.
Ah, know you not the city favours them,
And they have troops of soldiers at their beck?
But when the duke is slain, they'll quickly fly.
Far be the thought of this from Henry's heart,
To make a shambles of the parliament-house!
Cousin of Exeter, frowns, words and threats
Shall be the war that Henry means to use.
Thou factious Duke of York, descend my throne,
and kneel for grace and mercy at my feet
I am thy sovereign.
I am thine.
For shame, come down: he made thee Duke of York.
'Twas my inheritance, as the earldom was.
Thy father was a traitor to the crown.
Exeter, thou art a traitor to the crown
In following this usurping Henry.
Whom should he follow but his natural king?
True, Clifford
And shall I stand, and thou sit in my throne?
It must and shall be so: content thyself.
Be Duke of Lancaster
He is both king and Duke of Lancaster
And that the Lord of Westmoreland shall maintain.
And Warwick shall disprove it. You forget
That we are those which chased you from the field
And slew your fathers, and with colours spread
March'd through the city to the palace gates.
Yes, Warwick, I remember it to my grief
And, by his soul, thou and thy house shall rue it.
Plantagenet, of thee and these thy sons,
Thy kinsman and thy friends, I'll have more lives
Than drops of blood were in my father's veins.
Urge it no more
I send thee, Warwick, such a messenger
As shall revenge his death before I stir.
Poor Clifford! how I scorn his worthless threats!
Will you we show our title to the crown?
If not, our swords shall plead it in the field.
What title hast thou, traitor, to the crown?
Thy father was, as thou art, Duke of York
Thy grandfather, Roger Mortimer, Earl of March:
I am the son of Henry the Fifth,
Who made the Dauphin and the French to stoop
And seized upon their towns and provinces.
Talk not of France, sith thou hast lost it all.
The lord protector lost it, and not I:
When I was crown'd I was but nine months old.
You are old enough now, and yet, methinks, you lose.
Father, tear the crown from the usurper's head.
Sweet father, do so
Good brother, as thou lovest and honourest arms,
Let's fight it out and not stand cavilling thus.
Sound drums and trumpets, and the king will fly.
Sons, peace!
Peace, thou! and give King Henry leave to speak.
Plantagenet shall speak first: hear him, lords
And be you silent and attentive too,
For he that interrupts him shall not live.
Think'st thou that I will leave my kingly throne,
Wherein my grandsire and my father sat?
No: first shall war unpeople this my realm
Ay, and their colours, often borne in France,
And now in England to our heart's great sorrow,
Shall be my winding-sheet. Why faint you, lords?
My title's good, and better far than his.
Prove it, Henry, and thou shalt be king.
Henry the Fourth by conquest got the crown.
'Twas by rebellion against his king.
[Aside]  I know not what to say
Tell me, may not a king adopt an heir?
What then?
An if he may, then am I lawful king
For Richard, in the view of many lords,
Resign'd the crown to Henry the Fourth,
Whose heir my father was, and I am his.
He rose against him, being his sovereign,
And made him to resign his crown perforce.
Suppose, my lords, he did it unconstrain'd,
Think you 'twere prejudicial to his crown?
No
But that the next heir should succeed and reign.
Art thou against us, Duke of Exeter?
His is the right, and therefore pardon me.
Why whisper you, my lords, and answer not?
My conscience tells me he is lawful king.
[Aside]  All will revolt from me, and turn to him.
Plantagenet, for all the claim thou lay'st,
Think not that Henry shall be so deposed.
Deposed he shall be, in despite of all.
Thou art deceived: 'tis not thy southern power,
Of Essex, Norfolk, Suffolk, nor of Kent,
Which makes thee thus presumptuous and proud,
Can set the duke up in despite of me.
King Henry, be thy title right or wrong,
Lord Clifford vows to fight in thy defence:
May that ground gape and swallow me alive,
Where I shall kneel to him that slew my father!
O Clifford, how thy words revive my heart!
Henry of Lancaster, resign thy crown.
What mutter you, or what conspire you, lords?
Do right unto this princely Duke of York,
Or I will fill the house with armed men,
And over the chair of state, where now he sits,
Write up his title with usurping blood.
He stamps with his foot and the soldiers show themselves
My Lord of Warwick, hear me but one word:
Let me for this my life-time reign as king.
Confirm the crown to me and to mine heirs,
And thou shalt reign in quiet while thou livest.
I am content: Richard Plantagenet,
Enjoy the kingdom after my decease.
What wrong is this unto the prince your son!
What good is this to England and himself!
Base, fearful and despairing Henry!
How hast thou injured both thyself and us!
I cannot stay to hear these articles.
Nor I.
Come, cousin, let us tell the queen these news.
Farewell, faint-hearted and degenerate king,
In whose cold blood no spark of honour bides.
Be thou a prey unto the house of York,
And die in bands for this unmanly deed!
In dreadful war mayst thou be overcome,
Or live in peace abandon'd and despised!
Exeunt NORTHUMBERLAND, CLIFFORD, and WESTMORELAND
Turn this way, Henry, and regard them not.
They seek revenge and therefore will not yield.
Ah, Exeter!
Why should you sigh, my lord?
Not for myself, Lord Warwick, but my son,
Whom I unnaturally shall disinherit.
But be it as it may: I here entail
The crown to thee and to thine heirs for ever
Conditionally, that here thou take an oath
To cease this civil war, and, whilst I live,
To honour me as thy king and sovereign,
And neither by treason nor hostility
To seek to put me down and reign thyself.
This oath I willingly take and will perform.
Long live King Henry! Plantagenet embrace him.
And long live thou and these thy forward sons!
Now York and Lancaster are reconciled.
Accursed be he that seeks to make them foes!
Sennet. Here they come down
Farewell, my gracious lord
And I'll keep London with my soldiers.
And I to Norfolk with my followers.
And I unto the sea from whence I came.
Exeunt YORK, EDWARD, EDMUND, GEORGE, RICHARD,  WARWICK, NORFOLK, MONTAGUE, their Soldiers, and Attendants
And I, with grief and sorrow, to the court.
Enter QUEEN MARGARET and PRINCE EDWARD
Here comes the queen, whose looks bewray her anger:
I'll steal away.
Exeter, so will I.
Nay, go not from me
Be patient, gentle queen, and I will stay.
Who can be patient in such extremes?
Ah, wretched man! would I had died a maid
And never seen thee, never borne thee son,
Seeing thou hast proved so unnatural a father
Hath he deserved to lose his birthright thus?
Hadst thou but loved him half so well as I,
Or felt that pain which I did for him once,
Or nourish'd him as I did with my blood,
Thou wouldst have left thy dearest heart-blood there,
Rather than have that savage duke thine heir
And disinherited thine only son.
Father, you cannot disinherit me:
If you be king, why should not I succeed?
Pardon me, Margaret
The Earl of Warwick and the duke enforced me.
Enforced thee! art thou king, and wilt be forced?
I shame to hear thee speak. Ah, timorous wretch!
Thou hast undone thyself, thy son and me
And given unto the house of York such head
As thou shalt reign but by their sufferance.
To entail him and his heirs unto the crown,
What is it, but to make thy sepulchre
And creep into it far before thy time?
Warwick is chancellor and the lord of Calais
Stern Falconbridge commands the narrow seas
The duke is made protector of the realm
And yet shalt thou be safe? such safety finds
The trembling lamb environed with wolves.
Had I been there, which am a silly woman,
The soldiers should have toss'd me on their pikes
Before I would have granted to that act.
But thou preferr'st thy life before thine honour:
And seeing thou dost, I here divorce myself
Both from thy table, Henry, and thy bed,
Until that act of parliament be repeal'd
Whereby my son is disinherited.
The northern lords that have forsworn thy colours
Will follow mine, if once they see them spread
And spread they shall be, to thy foul disgrace
And utter ruin of the house of York.
Thus do I leave thee. Come, son, let's away
Our army is ready
Stay, gentle Margaret, and hear me speak.
Thou hast spoke too much already: get thee gone.
Gentle son Edward, thou wilt stay with me?
Ay, to be murder'd by his enemies.
When I return with victory from the field
I'll see your grace: till then I'll follow her.
Come, son, away
Exeunt QUEEN MARGARET and PRINCE EDWARD
Poor queen! how love to me and to her son
Hath made her break out into terms of rage!
Revenged may she be on that hateful duke,
Whose haughty spirit, winged with desire,
Will cost my crown, and like an empty eagle
Tire on the flesh of me and of my son!
The loss of those three lords torments my heart:
I'll write unto them and entreat them fair.
Come, cousin you shall be the messenger.
And I, I hope, shall reconcile them all.
Exeunt
SCENE II. Sandal Castle.
Enter RICHARD, EDWARD, and MONTAGUE
Brother, though I be youngest, give me leave.
No, I can better play the orator.
But I have reasons strong and forcible.
Enter YORK
Why, how now, sons and brother! at a strife?
What is your quarrel? how began it first?
No quarrel, but a slight contention.
About what?
About that which concerns your grace and us
The crown of England, father, which is yours.
Mine boy? not till King Henry be dead.
Your right depends not on his life or death.
Now you are heir, therefore enjoy it now:
By giving the house of Lancaster leave to breathe,
It will outrun you, father, in the end.
I took an oath that he should quietly reign.
But for a kingdom any oath may be broken:
I would break a thousand oaths to reign one year.
No
I shall be, if I claim by open war.
I'll prove the contrary, if you'll hear me speak.
Thou canst not, son
An oath is of no moment, being not took
Before a true and lawful magistrate,
That hath authority over him that swears:
Henry had none, but did usurp the place
Then, seeing 'twas he that made you to depose,
Your oath, my lord, is vain and frivolous.
Therefore, to arms! And, father, do but think
How sweet a thing it is to wear a crown
Within whose circuit is Elysium
And all that poets feign of bliss and joy.
Why do we finger thus? I cannot rest
Until the white rose that I wear be dyed
Even in the lukewarm blood of Henry's heart.
Richard, enough
Brother, thou shalt to London presently,
And whet on Warwick to this enterprise.
Thou, Richard, shalt to the Duke of Norfolk,
And tell him privily of our intent.
You Edward, shall unto my Lord Cobham,
With whom the Kentishmen will willingly rise:
In them I trust
Witty, courteous, liberal, full of spirit.
While you are thus employ'd, what resteth more,
But that I seek occasion how to rise,
And yet the king not privy to my drift,
Nor any of the house of Lancaster?
Enter a Messenger
But, stay: what news? Why comest thou in such post?
The queen with all the northern earls and lords
Intend here to besiege you in your castle:
She is hard by with twenty thousand men
And therefore fortify your hold, my lord.
Ay, with my sword. What! think'st thou that we fear them?
Edward and Richard, you shall stay with me
My brother Montague shall post to London:
Let noble Warwick, Cobham, and the rest,
Whom we have left protectors of the king,
With powerful policy strengthen themselves,
And trust not simple Henry nor his oaths.
Brother, I go
And thus most humbly I do take my leave.
Exit
Enter JOHN MORTIMER and HUGH MORTIMER
Sir John and Sir Hugh Mortimer, mine uncles,
You are come to Sandal in a happy hour
The army of the queen mean to besiege us.
She shall not need
What, with five thousand men?
Ay, with five hundred, father, for a need:
A woman's general
A march afar off
I hear their drums: let's set our men in order,
And issue forth and bid them battle straight.
Five men to twenty! though the odds be great,
I doubt not, uncle, of our victory.
Many a battle have I won in France,
When as the enemy hath been ten to one:
Why should I not now have the like success?
Alarum. Exeunt
SCENE III. Field of battle betwixt Sandal Castle and Wakefield.
Alarums. Enter RUTLAND and his Tutor
Ah, whither shall I fly to 'scape their hands?
Ah, tutor, look where bloody Clifford comes!
Enter CLIFFORD and Soldiers
Chaplain, away! thy priesthood saves thy life.
As for the brat of this accursed duke,
Whose father slew my father, he shall die.
And I, my lord, will bear him company.
Soldiers, away with him!
Ah, Clifford, murder not this innocent child,
Lest thou be hated both of God and man!
Exit, dragged off by Soldiers
How now! is he dead already? or is it fear
That makes him close his eyes? I'll open them.
So looks the pent-up lion o'er the wretch
That trembles under his devouring paws
And so he walks, insulting o'er his prey,
And so he comes, to rend his limbs asunder.
Ah, gentle Clifford, kill me with thy sword,
And not with such a cruel threatening look.
Sweet Clifford, hear me speak before I die.
I am too mean a subject for thy wrath:
Be thou revenged on men, and let me live.
In vain thou speak'st, poor boy
Hath stopp'd the passage where thy words should enter.
Then let my father's blood open it again:
He is a man, and, Clifford, cope with him.
Had thy brethren here, their lives and thine
Were not revenge sufficient for me
No, if I digg'd up thy forefathers' graves
And hung their rotten coffins up in chains,
It could not slake mine ire, nor ease my heart.
The sight of any of the house of York
Is as a fury to torment my soul
And till I root out their accursed line
And leave not one alive, I live in hell.
Therefore--
Lifting his hand
O, let me pray before I take my death!
To thee I pray
Such pity as my rapier's point affords.
I never did thee harm: why wilt thou slay me?
Thy father hath.
But 'twas ere I was born.
Thou hast one son
Lest in revenge thereof, sith God is just,
He be as miserably slain as I.
Ah, let me live in prison all my days
And when I give occasion of offence,
Then let me die, for now thou hast no cause.
No cause!
Thy father slew my father
Stabs him
Di faciant laudis summa sit ista tuae!
Dies
Plantagenet! I come, Plantagenet!
And this thy son's blood cleaving to my blade
Shall rust upon my weapon, till thy blood,
Congeal'd with this, do make me wipe off both.
Exit
SCENE IV. Another part of the field.
Alarum. Enter YORK
The army of the queen hath got the field:
My uncles both are slain in rescuing me
And all my followers to the eager foe
Turn back and fly, like ships before the wind
Or lambs pursued by hunger-starved wolves.
My sons, God knows what hath bechanced them:
But this I know, they have demean'd themselves
Like men born to renown by life or death.
Three times did Richard make a lane to me.
And thrice cried 'Courage, father! fight it out!'
And full as oft came Edward to my side,
With purple falchion, painted to the hilt
In blood of those that had encounter'd him:
And when the hardiest warriors did retire,
Richard cried 'Charge! and give no foot of ground!'
And cried 'A crown, or else a glorious tomb!
A sceptre, or an earthly sepulchre!'
With this, we charged again: but, out, alas!
We bodged again
With bootless labour swim against the tide
And spend her strength with over-matching waves.
A short alarum within
Ah, hark! the fatal followers do pursue
And I am faint and cannot fly their fury:
And were I strong, I would not shun their fury:
The sands are number'd that make up my life
Here must I stay, and here my life must end.
Enter QUEEN MARGARET, CLIFFORD, NORTHUMBERLAND, PRINCE EDWARD, and Soldiers
Come, bloody Clifford, rough Northumberland,
I dare your quenchless fury to more rage:
I am your butt, and I abide your shot.
Yield to our mercy, proud Plantagenet.
Ay, to such mercy as his ruthless arm,
With downright payment, show'd unto my father.
Now Phaethon hath tumbled from his car,
And made an evening at the noontide prick.
My ashes, as the phoenix, may bring forth
A bird that will revenge upon you all:
And in that hope I throw mine eyes to heaven,
Scorning whate'er you can afflict me with.
Why come you not? what! multitudes, and fear?
So cowards fight when they can fly no further
So doves do peck the falcon's piercing talons
So desperate thieves, all hopeless of their lives,
Breathe out invectives 'gainst the officers.
O Clifford, but bethink thee once again,
And in thy thought o'er-run my former time
And, if though canst for blushing, view this face,
And bite thy tongue, that slanders him with cowardice
Whose frown hath made thee faint and fly ere this!
I will not bandy with thee word for word,
But buckle with thee blows, twice two for one.
Hold, valiant Clifford! for a thousand causes
I would prolong awhile the traitor's life.
Wrath makes him deaf: speak thou, Northumberland.
Hold, Clifford! do not honour him so much
To prick thy finger, though to wound his heart:
What valour were it, when a cur doth grin,
For one to thrust his hand between his teeth,
When he might spurn him with his foot away?
It is war's prize to take all vantages
And ten to one is no impeach of valour.
They lay hands on YORK, who struggles
Ay, ay, so strives the woodcock with the gin.
So doth the cony struggle in the net.
So triumph thieves upon their conquer'd booty
So true men yield, with robbers so o'ermatch'd.
What would your grace have done unto him now?
Brave warriors, Clifford and Northumberland,
Come, make him stand upon this molehill here,
That raught at mountains with outstretched arms,
Yet parted but the shadow with his hand.
What! was it you that would be England's king?
Was't you that revell'd in our parliament,
And made a preachment of your high descent?
Where are your mess of sons to back you now?
The wanton Edward, and the lusty George?
And where's that valiant crook-back prodigy,
Dicky your boy, that with his grumbling voice
Was wont to cheer his dad in mutinies?
Or, with the rest, where is your darling Rutland?
Look, York: I stain'd this napkin with the blood
That valiant Clifford, with his rapier's point,
Made issue from the bosom of the boy
And if thine eyes can water for his death,
I give thee this to dry thy cheeks withal.
Alas poor York! but that I hate thee deadly,
I should lament thy miserable state.
I prithee, grieve, to make me merry, York.
What, hath thy fiery heart so parch'd thine entrails
That not a tear can fall for Rutland's death?
Why art thou patient, man? thou shouldst be mad
And I, to make thee mad, do mock thee thus.
Stamp, rave, and fret, that I may sing and dance.
Thou wouldst be fee'd, I see, to make me sport:
York cannot speak, unless he wear a crown.
A crown for York! and, lords, bow low to him:
Hold you his hands, whilst I do set it on.
Putting a paper crown on his head
Ay, marry, sir, now looks he like a king!
Ay, this is he that took King Henry's chair,
And this is he was his adopted heir.
But how is it that great Plantagenet
Is crown'd so soon, and broke his solemn oath?
As I bethink me, you should not be king
Till our King Henry had shook hands with death.
And will you pale your head in Henry's glory,
And rob his temples of the diadem,
Now in his life, against your holy oath?
O, 'tis a fault too too unpardonable!
Off with the crown, and with the crown his head
And, whilst we breathe, take time to do him dead.
That is my office, for my father's sake.
Nay, stay
She-wolf of France, but worse than wolves of France,
Whose tongue more poisons than the adder's tooth!
How ill-beseeming is it in thy sex
To triumph, like an Amazonian trull,
Upon their woes whom fortune captivates!
But that thy face is, vizard-like, unchanging,
Made impudent with use of evil deeds,
I would assay, proud queen, to make thee blush.
To tell thee whence thou camest, of whom derived,
Were shame enough to shame thee, wert thou not shameless.
Thy father bears the type of King of Naples,
Of both the Sicils and Jerusalem,
Yet not so wealthy as an English yeoman.
Hath that poor monarch taught thee to insult?
It needs not, nor it boots thee not, proud queen,
Unless the adage must be verified,
That beggars mounted run their horse to death.
'Tis beauty that doth oft make women proud
But, God he knows, thy share thereof is small:
'Tis virtue that doth make them most admired
The contrary doth make thee wonder'd at:
'Tis government that makes them seem divine
The want thereof makes thee abominable:
Thou art as opposite to every good
As the Antipodes are unto us,
Or as the south to the septentrion.
O tiger's heart wrapt in a woman's hide!
How couldst thou drain the life-blood of the child,
To bid the father wipe his eyes withal,
And yet be seen to bear a woman's face?
Women are soft, mild, pitiful and flexible
Thou stern, obdurate, flinty, rough, remorseless.
Bids't thou me rage? why, now thou hast thy wish:
Wouldst have me weep? why, now thou hast thy will:
For raging wind blows up incessant showers,
And when the rage allays, the rain begins.
These tears are my sweet Rutland's obsequies:
And every drop cries vengeance for his death,
'Gainst thee, fell Clifford, and thee, false
Frenchwoman.
Beshrew me, but his passion moves me so
That hardly can I cheque my eyes from tears.
That face of his the hungry cannibals
Would not have touch'd, would not have stain'd with blood:
But you are more inhuman, more inexorable,
O, ten times more, than tigers of Hyrcania.
See, ruthless queen, a hapless father's tears:
This cloth thou dip'dst in blood of my sweet boy,
And I with tears do wash the blood away.
Keep thou the napkin, and go boast of this:
And if thou tell'st the heavy story right,
Upon my soul, the hearers will shed tears
Yea even my foes will shed fast-falling tears,
And say 'Alas, it was a piteous deed!'
There, take the crown, and, with the crown, my curse
And in thy need such comfort come to thee
As now I reap at thy too cruel hand!
Hard-hearted Clifford, take me from the world:
My soul to heaven, my blood upon your heads!
Had he been slaughter-man to all my kin,
I should not for my life but weep with him.
To see how inly sorrow gripes his soul.
What, weeping-ripe, my Lord Northumberland?
Think but upon the wrong he did us all,
And that will quickly dry thy melting tears.
Here's for my oath, here's for my father's death.
Stabbing him
And here's to right our gentle-hearted king.
Stabbing him
Open Thy gate of mercy, gracious God!
My soul flies through these wounds to seek out Thee.
Dies
Off with his head, and set it on York gates
So York may overlook the town of York.
Flourish. Exeunt
ACT II
SCENE I. A plain near Mortimer's Cross in Herefordshire.
A march. Enter EDWARD, RICHARD, and their power
I wonder how our princely father 'scaped,
Or whether he be 'scaped away or no
From Clifford's and Northumberland's pursuit:
Had he been ta'en, we should have heard the news
Had he been slain, we should have heard the news
Or had he 'scaped, methinks we should have heard
The happy tidings of his good escape.
How fares my brother? why is he so sad?
I cannot joy, until I be resolved
Where our right valiant father is become.
I saw him in the battle range about
And watch'd him how he singled Clifford forth.
Methought he bore him in the thickest troop
As doth a lion in a herd of neat
Or as a bear, encompass'd round with dogs,
Who having pinch'd a few and made them cry,
The rest stand all aloof, and bark at him.
So fared our father with his enemies
So fled his enemies my warlike father:
Methinks, 'tis prize enough to be his son.
See how the morning opes her golden gates,
And takes her farewell of the glorious sun!
How well resembles it the prime of youth,
Trimm'd like a younker prancing to his love!
Dazzle mine eyes, or do I see three suns?
Three glorious suns, each one a perfect sun
Not separated with the racking clouds,
But sever'd in a pale clear-shining sky.
See, see! they join, embrace, and seem to kiss,
As if they vow'd some league inviolable:
Now are they but one lamp, one light, one sun.
In this the heaven figures some event.
'Tis wondrous strange, the like yet never heard of.
I think it cites us, brother, to the field,
That we, the sons of brave Plantagenet,
Each one already blazing by our meeds,
Should notwithstanding join our lights together
And over-shine the earth as this the world.
Whate'er it bodes, henceforward will I bear
Upon my target three fair-shining suns.
Nay, bear three daughters: by your leave I speak it,
You love the breeder better than the male.
Enter a Messenger
But what art thou, whose heavy looks foretell
Some dreadful story hanging on thy tongue?
Ah, one that was a woful looker-on
When as the noble Duke of York was slain,
Your princely father and my loving lord!
O, speak no more, for I have heard too much.
Say how he died, for I will hear it all.
Environed he was with many foes,
And stood against them, as the hope of Troy
Against the Greeks that would have enter'd Troy.
But Hercules himself must yield to odds
And many strokes, though with a little axe,
Hew down and fell the hardest-timber'd oak.
By many hands your father was subdued
But only slaughter'd by the ireful arm
Of unrelenting Clifford and the queen,
Who crown'd the gracious duke in high despite,
Laugh'd in his face
The ruthless queen gave him to dry his cheeks
A napkin steeped in the harmless blood
Of sweet young Rutland, by rough Clifford slain:
And after many scorns, many foul taunts,
They took his head, and on the gates of York
They set the same
The saddest spectacle that e'er I view'd.
Sweet Duke of York, our prop to lean upon,
Now thou art gone, we have no staff, no stay.
O Clifford, boisterous Clifford! thou hast slain
The flower of Europe for his chivalry
And treacherously hast thou vanquish'd him,
For hand to hand he would have vanquish'd thee.
Now my soul's palace is become a prison:
Ah, would she break from hence, that this my body
Might in the ground be closed up in rest!
For never henceforth shall I joy again,
Never, O never shall I see more joy!
I cannot weep
Scarce serves to quench my furnace-burning heart:
Nor can my tongue unload my heart's great burthen
For selfsame wind that I should speak withal
Is kindling coals that fires all my breast,
And burns me up with flames that tears would quench.
To weep is to make less the depth of grief:
Tears then for babes
Richard, I bear thy name
Or die renowned by attempting it.
His name that valiant duke hath left with thee
His dukedom and his chair with me is left.
Nay, if thou be that princely eagle's bird,
Show thy descent by gazing 'gainst the sun:
For chair and dukedom, throne and kingdom say
Either that is thine, or else thou wert not his.
March. Enter WARWICK, MONTAGUE, and their army
How now, fair lords! What fare? what news abroad?
Great Lord of Warwick, if we should recount
Our baleful news, and at each word's deliverance
Stab poniards in our flesh till all were told,
The words would add more anguish than the wounds.
O valiant lord, the Duke of York is slain!
O Warwick, Warwick! that Plantagenet,
Which held three dearly as his soul's redemption,
Is by the stern Lord Clifford done to death.
Ten days ago I drown'd these news in tears
And now, to add more measure to your woes,
I come to tell you things sith then befall'n.
After the bloody fray at Wakefield fought,
Where your brave father breathed his latest gasp,
Tidings, as swiftly as the posts could run,
Were brought me of your loss and his depart.
I, then in London keeper of the king,
Muster'd my soldiers, gather'd flocks of friends,
And very well appointed, as I thought,
March'd toward Saint Alban's to intercept the queen,
Bearing the king in my behalf along
For by my scouts I was advertised
That she was coming with a full intent
To dash our late decree in parliament
Touching King Henry's oath and your succession.
Short tale to make, we at Saint Alban's met
Our battles join'd, and both sides fiercely fought:
But whether 'twas the coldness of the king,
Who look'd full gently on his warlike queen,
That robb'd my soldiers of their heated spleen
Or whether 'twas report of her success
Or more than common fear of Clifford's rigour,
Who thunders to his captives blood and death,
I cannot judge: but to conclude with truth,
Their weapons like to lightning came and went
Our soldiers', like the night-owl's lazy flight,
Or like an idle thresher with a flail,
Fell gently down, as if they struck their friends.
I cheer'd them up with justice of our cause,
With promise of high pay and great rewards:
But all in vain
And we in them no hope to win the day
So that we fled
Lord George your brother, Norfolk and myself,
In haste, post-haste, are come to join with you:
For in the marches here we heard you were,
Making another head to fight again.
Where is the Duke of Norfolk, gentle Warwick?
And when came George from Burgundy to England?
Some six miles off the duke is with the soldiers
And for your brother, he was lately sent
From your kind aunt, Duchess of Burgundy,
With aid of soldiers to this needful war.
'Twas odds, belike, when valiant Warwick fled:
Oft have I heard his praises in pursuit,
But ne'er till now his scandal of retire.
Nor now my scandal, Richard, dost thou hear
For thou shalt know this strong right hand of mine
Can pluck the diadem from faint Henry's head,
And wring the awful sceptre from his fist,
Were he as famous and as bold in war
As he is famed for mildness, peace, and prayer.
I know it well, Lord Warwick
'Tis love I bear thy glories makes me speak.
But in this troublous time what's to be done?
Shall we go throw away our coats of steel,
And wrap our bodies in black mourning gowns,
Numbering our Ave-Maries with our beads?
Or shall we on the helmets of our foes
Tell our devotion with revengeful arms?
If for the last, say ay, and to it, lords.
Why, therefore Warwick came to seek you out
And therefore comes my brother Montague.
Attend me, lords. The proud insulting queen,
With Clifford and the haught Northumberland,
And of their feather many more proud birds,
Have wrought the easy-melting king like wax.
He swore consent to your succession,
His oath enrolled in the parliament
And now to London all the crew are gone,
To frustrate both his oath and what beside
May make against the house of Lancaster.
Their power, I think, is thirty thousand strong:
Now, if the help of Norfolk and myself,
With all the friends that thou, brave Earl of March,
Amongst the loving Welshmen canst procure,
Will but amount to five and twenty thousand,
Why, Via! to London will we march amain,
And once again bestride our foaming steeds,
And once again cry 'Charge upon our foes!'
But never once again turn back and fly.
Ay, now methinks I hear great Warwick speak:
Ne'er may he live to see a sunshine day,
That cries 'Retire,' if Warwick bid him stay.
Lord Warwick, on thy shoulder will I lean
And when thou fail'st--as God forbid the hour!--
Must Edward fall, which peril heaven forfend!
No longer Earl of March, but Duke of York:
The next degree is England's royal throne
For King of England shalt thou be proclaim'd
In every borough as we pass along
And he that throws not up his cap for joy
Shall for the fault make forfeit of his head.
King Edward, valiant Richard, Montague,
Stay we no longer, dreaming of renown,
But sound the trumpets, and about our task.
Then, Clifford, were thy heart as hard as steel,
As thou hast shown it flinty by thy deeds,
I come to pierce it, or to give thee mine.
Then strike up drums: God and Saint George for us!
Enter a Messenger
How now! what news?
The Duke of Norfolk sends you word by me,
The queen is coming with a puissant host
And craves your company for speedy counsel.
Why then it sorts, brave warriors, let's away.
Exeunt
SCENE II. Before York.
Flourish. Enter KING HENRY VI, QUEEN MARGARET,  PRINCE EDWARD, CLIFFORD, and NORTHUMBERLAND, with drum and trumpets
Welcome, my lord, to this brave town of York.
Yonder's the head of that arch-enemy
That sought to be encompass'd with your crown:
Doth not the object cheer your heart, my lord?
Ay, as the rocks cheer them that fear their wreck:
To see this sight, it irks my very soul.
Withhold revenge, dear God! 'tis not my fault,
Nor wittingly have I infringed my vow.
My gracious liege, this too much lenity
And harmful pity must be laid aside.
To whom do lions cast their gentle looks?
Not to the beast that would usurp their den.
Whose hand is that the forest bear doth lick?
Not his that spoils her young before her face.
Who 'scapes the lurking serpent's mortal sting?
Not he that sets his foot upon her back.
The smallest worm will turn being trodden on,
And doves will peck in safeguard of their brood.
Ambitious York doth level at thy crown,
Thou smiling while he knit his angry brows:
He, but a duke, would have his son a king,
And raise his issue, like a loving sire
Thou, being a king, blest with a goodly son,
Didst yield consent to disinherit him,
Which argued thee a most unloving father.
Unreasonable creatures feed their young
And though man's face be fearful to their eyes,
Yet, in protection of their tender ones,
Who hath not seen them, even with those wings
Which sometime they have used with fearful flight,
Make war with him that climb'd unto their nest,
Offer their own lives in their young's defence?
For shame, my liege, make them your precedent!
Were it not pity that this goodly boy
Should lose his birthright by his father's fault,
And long hereafter say unto his child,
'What my great-grandfather and his grandsire got
My careless father fondly gave away'?
Ah, what a shame were this! Look on the boy
And let his manly face, which promiseth
Successful fortune, steel thy melting heart
To hold thine own and leave thine own with him.
Full well hath Clifford play'd the orator,
Inferring arguments of mighty force.
But, Clifford, tell me, didst thou never hear
That things ill-got had ever bad success?
And happy always was it for that son
Whose father for his hoarding went to hell?
I'll leave my son my virtuous deeds behind
And would my father had left me no more!
For all the rest is held at such a rate
As brings a thousand-fold more care to keep
Than in possession and jot of pleasure.
Ah, cousin York! would thy best friends did know
How it doth grieve me that thy head is here!
My lord, cheer up your spirits: our foes are nigh,
And this soft courage makes your followers faint.
You promised knighthood to our forward son:
Unsheathe your sword, and dub him presently.
Edward, kneel down.
Edward Plantagenet, arise a knight
And learn this lesson, draw thy sword in right.
My gracious father, by your kingly leave,
I'll draw it as apparent to the crown,
And in that quarrel use it to the death.
Why, that is spoken like a toward prince.
Enter a Messenger
Royal commanders, be in readiness:
For with a band of thirty thousand men
Comes Warwick, backing of the Duke of York
And in the towns, as they do march along,
Proclaims him king, and many fly to him:
Darraign your battle, for they are at hand.
I would your highness would depart the field:
The queen hath best success when you are absent.
Ay, good my lord, and leave us to our fortune.
Why, that's my fortune too
Be it with resolution then to fight.
My royal father, cheer these noble lords
And hearten those that fight in your defence:
Unsheathe your sword, good father
March. Enter EDWARD, GEORGE, RICHARD, WARWICK, NORFOLK, MONTAGUE, and Soldiers
Now, perjured Henry! wilt thou kneel for grace,
And set thy diadem upon my head
Or bide the mortal fortune of the field?
Go, rate thy minions, proud insulting boy!
Becomes it thee to be thus bold in terms
Before thy sovereign and thy lawful king?
I am his king, and he should bow his knee
I was adopted heir by his consent:
Since when, his oath is broke
You, that are king, though he do wear the crown,
Have caused him, by new act of parliament,
To blot out me, and put his own son in.
And reason too:
Who should succeed the father but the son?
Are you there, butcher? O, I cannot speak!
Ay, crook-back, here I stand to answer thee,
Or any he the proudest of thy sort.
'Twas you that kill'd young Rutland, was it not?
Ay, and old York, and yet not satisfied.
For God's sake, lords, give signal to the fight.
What say'st thou, Henry, wilt thou yield the crown?
Why, how now, long-tongued Warwick! dare you speak?
When you and I met at Saint Alban's last,
Your legs did better service than your hands.
Then 'twas my turn to fly, and now 'tis thine.
You said so much before, and yet you fled.
'Twas not your valour, Clifford, drove me thence.
No, nor your manhood that durst make you stay.
Northumberland, I hold thee reverently.
Break off the parley
The execution of my big-swoln heart
Upon that Clifford, that cruel child-killer.
I slew thy father, call'st thou him a child?
Ay, like a dastard and a treacherous coward,
As thou didst kill our tender brother Rutland
But ere sunset I'll make thee curse the deed.
Have done with words, my lords, and hear me speak.
Defy them then, or else hold close thy lips.
I prithee, give no limits to my tongue:
I am a king, and privileged to speak.
My liege, the wound that bred this meeting here
Cannot be cured by words
Then, executioner, unsheathe thy sword:
By him that made us all, I am resolved
that Clifford's manhood lies upon his tongue.
Say, Henry, shall I have my right, or no?
A thousand men have broke their fasts to-day,
That ne'er shall dine unless thou yield the crown.
If thou deny, their blood upon thy head
For York in justice puts his armour on.
If that be right which Warwick says is right,
There is no wrong, but every thing is right.
Whoever got thee, there thy mother stands
For, well I wot, thou hast thy mother's tongue.
But thou art neither like thy sire nor dam
But like a foul mis-shapen stigmatic,
Mark'd by the destinies to be avoided,
As venom toads, or lizards' dreadful stings.
Iron of Naples hid with English gilt,
Whose father bears the title of a king,--
As if a channel should be call'd the sea,--
Shamest thou not, knowing whence thou art extraught,
To let thy tongue detect thy base-born heart?
A wisp of straw were worth a thousand crowns,
To make this shameless callet know herself.
Helen of Greece was fairer far than thou,
Although thy husband may be Menelaus
And ne'er was Agamemnon's brother wrong'd
By that false woman, as this king by thee.
His father revell'd in the heart of France,
And tamed the king, and made the dauphin stoop
And had he match'd according to his state,
He might have kept that glory to this day
But when he took a beggar to his bed,
And graced thy poor sire with his bridal-day,
Even then that sunshine brew'd a shower for him,
That wash'd his father's fortunes forth of France,
And heap'd sedition on his crown at home.
For what hath broach'd this tumult but thy pride?
Hadst thou been meek, our title still had slept
And we, in pity of the gentle king,
Had slipp'd our claim until another age.
But when we saw our sunshine made thy spring,
And that thy summer bred us no increase,
We set the axe to thy usurping root
And though the edge hath something hit ourselves,
Yet, know thou, since we have begun to strike,
We'll never leave till we have hewn thee down,
Or bathed thy growing with our heated bloods.
And, in this resolution, I defy thee
Not willing any longer conference,
Since thou deniest the gentle king to speak.
Sound trumpets! let our bloody colours wave!
And either victory, or else a grave.
Stay, Edward.
No, wrangling woman, we'll no longer stay:
These words will cost ten thousand lives this day.
Exeunt
SCENE III. A field of battle between Towton and Saxton, in
Yorkshire.
Alarum. Excursions. Enter WARWICK
Forspent with toil, as runners with a race,
I lay me down a little while to breathe
For strokes received, and many blows repaid,
Have robb'd my strong-knit sinews of their strength,
And spite of spite needs must I rest awhile.
Enter EDWARD, running
Smile, gentle heaven! or strike, ungentle death!
For this world frowns, and Edward's sun is clouded.
How now, my lord! what hap? what hope of good?
Enter GEORGE
Our hap is loss, our hope but sad despair
Our ranks are broke, and ruin follows us:
What counsel give you? whither shall we fly?
Bootless is flight, they follow us with wings
And weak we are and cannot shun pursuit.
Enter RICHARD
Ah, Warwick, why hast thou withdrawn thyself?
Thy brother's blood the thirsty earth hath drunk,
Broach'd with the steely point of Clifford's lance
And in the very pangs of death he cried,
Like to a dismal clangour heard from far,
'Warwick, revenge! brother, revenge my death!'
So, underneath the belly of their steeds,
That stain'd their fetlocks in his smoking blood,
The noble gentleman gave up the ghost.
Then let the earth be drunken with our blood:
I'll kill my horse, because I will not fly.
Why stand we like soft-hearted women here,
Wailing our losses, whiles the foe doth rage
And look upon, as if the tragedy
Were play'd in jest by counterfeiting actors?
Here on my knee I vow to God above,
I'll never pause again, never stand still,
Till either death hath closed these eyes of mine
Or fortune given me measure of revenge.
O Warwick, I do bend my knee with thine
And in this vow do chain my soul to thine!
And, ere my knee rise from the earth's cold face,
I throw my hands, mine eyes, my heart to thee,
Thou setter up and plucker down of kings,
Beseeching thee, if with they will it stands
That to my foes this body must be prey,
Yet that thy brazen gates of heaven may ope,
And give sweet passage to my sinful soul!
Now, lords, take leave until we meet again,
Where'er it be, in heaven or in earth.
Brother, give me thy hand
Let me embrace thee in my weary arms:
I, that did never weep, now melt with woe
That winter should cut off our spring-time so.
Away, away! Once more, sweet lords farewell.
Yet let us all together to our troops,
And give them leave to fly that will not stay
And call them pillars that will stand to us
And, if we thrive, promise them such rewards
As victors wear at the Olympian games:
This may plant courage in their quailing breasts
For yet is hope of life and victory.
Forslow no longer, make we hence amain.
Exeunt
SCENE IV. Another part of the field.
Excursions. Enter RICHARD and CLIFFORD
Now, Clifford, I have singled thee alone:
Suppose this arm is for the Duke of York,
And this for Rutland
Wert thou environ'd with a brazen wall.
Now, Richard, I am with thee here alone:
This is the hand that stabb'd thy father York
And this the hand that slew thy brother Rutland
And here's the heart that triumphs in their death
And cheers these hands that slew thy sire and brother
To execute the like upon thyself
And so, have at thee!
They fight. WARWICK comes
Nay Warwick, single out some other chase
For I myself will hunt this wolf to death.
Exeunt
SCENE V. Another part of the field.
Alarum. Enter KING HENRY VI alone
This battle fares like to the morning's war,
When dying clouds contend with growing light,
What time the shepherd, blowing of his nails,
Can neither call it perfect day nor night.
Now sways it this way, like a mighty sea
Forced by the tide to combat with the wind
Now sways it that way, like the selfsame sea
Forced to retire by fury of the wind:
Sometime the flood prevails, and then the wind
Now one the better, then another best
Both tugging to be victors, breast to breast,
Yet neither conqueror nor conquered:
So is the equal of this fell war.
Here on this molehill will I sit me down.
To whom God will, there be the victory!
For Margaret my queen, and Clifford too,
Have chid me from the battle
They prosper best of all when I am thence.
Would I were dead! if God's good will were so
For what is in this world but grief and woe?
O God! methinks it were a happy life,
To be no better than a homely swain
To sit upon a hill, as I do now,
To carve out dials quaintly, point by point,
Thereby to see the minutes how they run,
How many make the hour full complete
How many hours bring about the day
How many days will finish up the year
How many years a mortal man may live.
When this is known, then to divide the times:
So many hours must I tend my flock
So many hours must I take my rest
So many hours must I contemplate
So many hours must I sport myself
So many days my ewes have been with young
So many weeks ere the poor fools will ean:
So many years ere I shall shear the fleece:
So minutes, hours, days, months, and years,
Pass'd over to the end they were created,
Would bring white hairs unto a quiet grave.
Ah, what a life were this! how sweet! how lovely!
Gives not the hawthorn-bush a sweeter shade
To shepherds looking on their silly sheep,
Than doth a rich embroider'd canopy
To kings that fear their subjects' treachery?
O, yes, it doth
And to conclude, the shepherd's homely curds,
His cold thin drink out of his leather bottle.
His wonted sleep under a fresh tree's shade,
All which secure and sweetly he enjoys,
Is far beyond a prince's delicates,
His viands sparkling in a golden cup,
His body couched in a curious bed,
When care, mistrust, and treason waits on him.
Alarum. Enter a Son that has killed his father, dragging in the dead body
Ill blows the wind that profits nobody.
This man, whom hand to hand I slew in fight,
May be possessed with some store of crowns
And I, that haply take them from him now,
May yet ere night yield both my life and them
To some man else, as this dead man doth me.
Who's this? O God! it is my father's face,
Whom in this conflict I unwares have kill'd.
O heavy times, begetting such events!
From London by the king was I press'd forth
My father, being the Earl of Warwick's man,
Came on the part of York, press'd by his master
And I, who at his hands received my life, him
Have by my hands of life bereaved him.
Pardon me, God, I knew not what I did!
And pardon, father, for I knew not thee!
My tears shall wipe away these bloody marks
And no more words till they have flow'd their fill.
O piteous spectacle! O bloody times!
Whiles lions war and battle for their dens,
Poor harmless lambs abide their enmity.
Weep, wretched man, I'll aid thee tear for tear
And let our hearts and eyes, like civil war,
Be blind with tears, and break o'ercharged with grief.
Enter a Father that has killed his son, bringing in the body
Thou that so stoutly hast resisted me,
Give me thy gold, if thou hast any gold:
For I have bought it with an hundred blows.
But let me see: is this our foeman's face?
Ah, no, no, no, it is mine only son!
Ah, boy, if any life be left in thee,
Throw up thine eye! see, see what showers arise,
Blown with the windy tempest of my heart,
Upon thy words, that kill mine eye and heart!
O, pity, God, this miserable age!
What stratagems, how fell, how butcherly,
Erroneous, mutinous and unnatural,
This deadly quarrel daily doth beget!
O boy, thy father gave thee life too soon,
And hath bereft thee of thy life too late!
Woe above woe! grief more than common grief!
O that my death would stay these ruthful deeds!
O pity, pity, gentle heaven, pity!
The red rose and the white are on his face,
The fatal colours of our striving houses:
The one his purple blood right well resembles
The other his pale cheeks, methinks, presenteth:
Wither one rose, and let the other flourish
If you contend, a thousand lives must wither.
How will my mother for a father's death
Take on with me and ne'er be satisfied!
How will my wife for slaughter of my son
Shed seas of tears and ne'er be satisfied!
How will the country for these woful chances
Misthink the king and not be satisfied!
Was ever son so rued a father's death?
Was ever father so bemoan'd his son?
Was ever king so grieved for subjects' woe?
Much is your sorrow
I'll bear thee hence, where I may weep my fill.
Exit with the body
These arms of mine shall be thy winding-sheet
My heart, sweet boy, shall be thy sepulchre,
For from my heart thine image ne'er shall go
My sighing breast shall be thy funeral bell
And so obsequious will thy father be,
Even for the loss of thee, having no more,
As Priam was for all his valiant sons.
I'll bear thee hence
For I have murdered where I should not kill.
Exit with the body
Sad-hearted men, much overgone with care,
Here sits a king more woful than you are.
Alarums: excursions. Enter QUEEN MARGARET, PRINCE EDWARD, and EXETER
Fly, father, fly! for all your friends are fled,
And Warwick rages like a chafed bull:
Away! for death doth hold us in pursuit.
Mount you, my lord
Edward and Richard, like a brace of greyhounds
Having the fearful flying hare in sight,
With fiery eyes sparkling for very wrath,
And bloody steel grasp'd in their ireful hands,
Are at our backs
Away! for vengeance comes along with them:
Nay, stay not to expostulate, make speed
Or else come after: I'll away before.
Nay, take me with thee, good sweet Exeter:
Not that I fear to stay, but love to go
Whither the queen intends. Forward
Exeunt
SCENE VI. Another part of the field.
A loud alarum. Enter CLIFFORD, wounded
Here burns my candle out
Which, whiles it lasted, gave King Henry light.
O Lancaster, I fear thy overthrow
More than my body's parting with my soul!
My love and fear glued many friends to thee
And, now I fall, thy tough commixture melts.
Impairing Henry, strengthening misproud York,
The common people swarm like summer flies
And whither fly the gnats but to the sun?
And who shines now but Henry's enemies?
O Phoebus, hadst thou never given consent
That Phaethon should cheque thy fiery steeds,
Thy burning car never had scorch'd the earth!
And, Henry, hadst thou sway'd as kings should do,
Or as thy father and his father did,
Giving no ground unto the house of York,
They never then had sprung like summer flies
I and ten thousand in this luckless realm
Had left no mourning widows for our death
And thou this day hadst kept thy chair in peace.
For what doth cherish weeds but gentle air?
And what makes robbers bold but too much lenity?
Bootless are plaints, and cureless are my wounds
No way to fly, nor strength to hold out flight:
The foe is merciless, and will not pity
For at their hands I have deserved no pity.
The air hath got into my deadly wounds,
And much effuse of blood doth make me faint.
Come, York and Richard, Warwick and the rest
I stabb'd your fathers' bosoms, split my breast.
He faints
Alarum and retreat. Enter EDWARD, GEORGE, RICHARD, MONTAGUE, WARWICK, and Soldiers
Now breathe we, lords: good fortune bids us pause,
And smooth the frowns of war with peaceful looks.
Some troops pursue the bloody-minded queen,
That led calm Henry, though he were a king,
As doth a sail, fill'd with a fretting gust,
Command an argosy to stem the waves.
But think you, lords, that Clifford fled with them?
No, 'tis impossible he should escape,
For, though before his face I speak the words
Your brother Richard mark'd him for the grave:
And wheresoe'er he is, he's surely dead.
CLIFFORD groans, and dies
Whose soul is that which takes her heavy leave?
A deadly groan, like life and death's departing.
See who it is: and, now the battle's ended,
If friend or foe, let him be gently used.
Revoke that doom of mercy, for 'tis Clifford
Who not contented that he lopp'd the branch
In hewing Rutland when his leaves put forth,
But set his murdering knife unto the root
From whence that tender spray did sweetly spring,
I mean our princely father, Duke of York.
From off the gates of York fetch down the head,
Your father's head, which Clifford placed there
Instead whereof let this supply the room:
Measure for measure must be answered.
Bring forth that fatal screech-owl to our house,
That nothing sung but death to us and ours:
Now death shall stop his dismal threatening sound,
And his ill-boding tongue no more shall speak.
I think his understanding is bereft.
Speak, Clifford, dost thou know who speaks to thee?
Dark cloudy death o'ershades his beams of life,
And he nor sees nor hears us what we say.
O, would he did! and so perhaps he doth:
'Tis but his policy to counterfeit,
Because he would avoid such bitter taunts
Which in the time of death he gave our father.
If so thou think'st, vex him with eager words.
Clifford, ask mercy and obtain no grace.
Clifford, repent in bootless penitence.
Clifford, devise excuses for thy faults.
While we devise fell tortures for thy faults.
Thou didst love York, and I am son to York.
Thou pitied'st Rutland
Where's Captain Margaret, to fence you now?
They mock thee, Clifford: swear as thou wast wont.
What, not an oath? nay, then the world goes hard
When Clifford cannot spare his friends an oath.
I know by that he's dead
If this right hand would buy two hour's life,
That I in all despite might rail at him,
This hand should chop it off, and with the
issuing blood
Stifle the villain whose unstanched thirst
York and young Rutland could not satisfy.
Ay, but he's dead: off with the traitor's head,
And rear it in the place your father's stands.
And now to London with triumphant march,
There to be crowned England's royal king:
From whence shall Warwick cut the sea to France,
And ask the Lady Bona for thy queen:
So shalt thou sinew both these lands together
And, having France thy friend, thou shalt not dread
The scatter'd foe that hopes to rise again
For though they cannot greatly sting to hurt,
Yet look to have them buzz to offend thine ears.
First will I see the coronation
And then to Brittany I'll cross the sea,
To effect this marriage, so it please my lord.
Even as thou wilt, sweet Warwick, let it be
For in thy shoulder do I build my seat,
And never will I undertake the thing
Wherein thy counsel and consent is wanting.
Richard, I will create thee Duke of Gloucester,
And George, of Clarence: Warwick, as ourself,
Shall do and undo as him pleaseth best.
Let me be Duke of Clarence, George of Gloucester
For Gloucester's dukedom is too ominous.
Tut, that's a foolish observation:
Richard, be Duke of Gloucester. Now to London,
To see these honours in possession.
Exeunt
ACT III
SCENE I. A forest in the north of England.
Enter two Keepers, with cross-bows in their hands
Under this thick-grown brake we'll shroud ourselves
For through this laund anon the deer will come
And in this covert will we make our stand,
Culling the principal of all the deer.
I'll stay above the hill, so both may shoot.
That cannot be
Will scare the herd, and so my shoot is lost.
Here stand we both, and aim we at the best:
And, for the time shall not seem tedious,
I'll tell thee what befell me on a day
In this self-place where now we mean to stand.
Here comes a man
Enter KING HENRY VI, disguised, with a prayerbook
From Scotland am I stol'n, even of pure love,
To greet mine own land with my wishful sight.
No, Harry, Harry, 'tis no land of thine
Thy place is fill'd, thy sceptre wrung from thee,
Thy balm wash'd off wherewith thou wast anointed:
No bending knee will call thee Caesar now,
No humble suitors press to speak for right,
No, not a man comes for redress of thee
For how can I help them, and not myself?
Ay, here's a deer whose skin's a keeper's fee:
This is the quondam king
Let me embrace thee, sour adversity,
For wise men say it is the wisest course.
Why linger we? let us lay hands upon him.
Forbear awhile
My queen and son are gone to France for aid
And, as I hear, the great commanding Warwick
Is thither gone, to crave the French king's sister
To wife for Edward: if this news be true,
Poor queen and son, your labour is but lost
For Warwick is a subtle orator,
And Lewis a prince soon won with moving words.
By this account then Margaret may win him
For she's a woman to be pitied much:
Her sighs will make a battery in his breast
Her tears will pierce into a marble heart
The tiger will be mild whiles she doth mourn
And Nero will be tainted with remorse,
To hear and see her plaints, her brinish tears.
Ay, but she's come to beg, Warwick to give
She, on his left side, craving aid for Henry,
He, on his right, asking a wife for Edward.
She weeps, and says her Henry is deposed
He smiles, and says his Edward is install'd
That she, poor wretch, for grief can speak no more
Whiles Warwick tells his title, smooths the wrong,
Inferreth arguments of mighty strength,
And in conclusion wins the king from her,
With promise of his sister, and what else,
To strengthen and support King Edward's place.
O Margaret, thus 'twill be
Art then forsaken, as thou went'st forlorn!
Say, what art thou that talk'st of kings and queens?
More than I seem, and less than I was born to:
A man at least, for less I should not be
And men may talk of kings, and why not I?
Ay, but thou talk'st as if thou wert a king.
Why, so I am, in mind
But, if thou be a king, where is thy crown?
My crown is in my heart, not on my head
Not decked with diamonds and Indian stones,
Nor to be seen: my crown is called content:
A crown it is that seldom kings enjoy.
Well, if you be a king crown'd with content,
Your crown content and you must be contented
To go along with us
You are the king King Edward hath deposed
And we his subjects sworn in all allegiance
Will apprehend you as his enemy.
But did you never swear, and break an oath?
No, never such an oath
Where did you dwell when I was King of England?
Here in this country, where we now remain.
I was anointed king at nine months old
My father and my grandfather were kings,
And you were sworn true subjects unto me:
And tell me, then, have you not broke your oaths?
No
For we were subjects but while you were king.
Why, am I dead? do I not breathe a man?
Ah, simple men, you know not what you swear!
Look, as I blow this feather from my face,
And as the air blows it to me again,
Obeying with my wind when I do blow,
And yielding to another when it blows,
Commanded always by the greater gust
Such is the lightness of you common men.
But do not break your oaths
My mild entreaty shall not make you guilty.
Go where you will, the king shall be commanded
And be you kings, command, and I'll obey.
We are true subjects to the king, King Edward.
So would you be again to Henry,
If he were seated as King Edward is.
We charge you, in God's name, and the king's,
To go with us unto the officers.
In God's name, lead
And what God will, that let your king perform
And what he will, I humbly yield unto.
Exeunt
SCENE II. London. The palace.
Enter KING EDWARD IV, GLOUCESTER, CLARENCE, and LADY GREY
Brother of Gloucester, at Saint Alban's field
This lady's husband, Sir Richard Grey, was slain,
His lands then seized on by the conqueror:
Her suit is now to repossess those lands
Which we in justice cannot well deny,
Because in quarrel of the house of York
The worthy gentleman did lose his life.
Your highness shall do well to grant her suit
It were dishonour to deny it her.
It were no less
[Aside to CLARENCE]  Yea, is it so?
I see the lady hath a thing to grant,
Before the king will grant her humble suit.
[Aside to GLOUCESTER]  He knows the game: how true
he keeps the wind!
[Aside to CLARENCE]  Silence!
Widow, we will consider of your suit
And come some other time to know our mind.
Right gracious lord, I cannot brook delay:
May it please your highness to resolve me now
And what your pleasure is, shall satisfy me.
[Aside to CLARENCE]  Ay, widow? then I'll warrant
you all your lands,
An if what pleases him shall pleasure you.
Fight closer, or, good faith, you'll catch a blow.
[Aside to GLOUCESTER]  I fear her not, unless she
chance to fall.
[Aside to CLARENCE] God forbid that! for he'll
take vantages.
How many children hast thou, widow? tell me.
[Aside to GLOUCESTER]  I think he means to beg a
child of her.
[Aside to CLARENCE]  Nay, whip me then: he'll rather
give her two.
Three, my most gracious lord.
[Aside to CLARENCE]  You shall have four, if you'll
be ruled by him.
'Twere pity they should lose their father's lands.
Be pitiful, dread lord, and grant it then.
Lords, give us leave: I'll try this widow's wit.
[Aside to CLARENCE]  Ay, good leave have you
you will have leave,
Till youth take leave and leave you to the crutch.
GLOUCESTER and CLARENCE retire
Now tell me, madam, do you love your children?
Ay, full as dearly as I love myself.
And would you not do much to do them good?
To do them good, I would sustain some harm.
Then get your husband's lands, to do them good.
Therefore I came unto your majesty.
I'll tell you how these lands are to be got.
So shall you bind me to your highness' service.
What service wilt thou do me, if I give them?
What you command, that rests in me to do.
But you will take exceptions to my boon.
No, gracious lord, except I cannot do it.
Ay, but thou canst do what I mean to ask.
Why, then I will do what your grace commands.
[Aside to CLARENCE]  He plies her hard
wears the marble.
[Aside to GLOUCESTER]  As red as fire! nay, then
her wax must melt.
Why stops my lord, shall I not hear my task?
An easy task
That's soon perform'd, because I am a subject.
Why, then, thy husband's lands I freely give thee.
I take my leave with many thousand thanks.
[Aside to CLARENCE]  The match is made
with a curtsy.
But stay thee, 'tis the fruits of love I mean.
The fruits of love I mean, my loving liege.
Ay, but, I fear me, in another sense.
What love, think'st thou, I sue so much to get?
My love till death, my humble thanks, my prayers
That love which virtue begs and virtue grants.
No, by my troth, I did not mean such love.
Why, then you mean not as I thought you did.
But now you partly may perceive my mind.
My mind will never grant what I perceive
Your highness aims at, if I aim aright.
To tell thee plain, I aim to lie with thee.
To tell you plain, I had rather lie in prison.
Why, then thou shalt not have thy husband's lands.
Why, then mine honesty shall be my dower
For by that loss I will not purchase them.
Therein thou wrong'st thy children mightily.
Herein your highness wrongs both them and me.
But, mighty lord, this merry inclination
Accords not with the sadness of my suit:
Please you dismiss me either with 'ay' or 'no.'
Ay, if thou wilt say 'ay' to my request
No if thou dost say 'no' to my demand.
Then, no, my lord. My suit is at an end.
[Aside to CLARENCE]  The widow likes him not, she
knits her brows.
[Aside to GLOUCESTER]  He is the bluntest wooer in
Christendom.
[Aside]  Her looks do argue her replete with modesty
Her words do show her wit incomparable
All her perfections challenge sovereignty:
One way or other, she is for a king
And she shall be my love, or else my queen.--
Say that King Edward take thee for his queen?
'Tis better said than done, my gracious lord:
I am a subject fit to jest withal,
But far unfit to be a sovereign.
Sweet widow, by my state I swear to thee
I speak no more than what my soul intends
And that is, to enjoy thee for my love.
And that is more than I will yield unto:
I know I am too mean to be your queen,
And yet too good to be your concubine.
You cavil, widow: I did mean, my queen.
'Twill grieve your grace my sons should call you father.
No more than when my daughters call thee mother.
Thou art a widow, and thou hast some children
And, by God's mother, I, being but a bachelor,
Have other some: why, 'tis a happy thing
To be the father unto many sons.
Answer no more, for thou shalt be my queen.
[Aside to CLARENCE]  The ghostly father now hath done
his shrift.
[Aside to GLOUCESTER]  When he was made a shriver,
'twas for shift.
Brothers, you muse what chat we two have had.
The widow likes it not, for she looks very sad.
You'll think it strange if I should marry her.
To whom, my lord?
Why, Clarence, to myself.
That would be ten days' wonder at the least.
That's a day longer than a wonder lasts.
By so much is the wonder in extremes.
Well, jest on, brothers: I can tell you both
Her suit is granted for her husband's lands.
Enter a Nobleman
My gracious lord, Henry your foe is taken,
And brought your prisoner to your palace gate.
See that he be convey'd unto the Tower:
And go we, brothers, to the man that took him,
To question of his apprehension.
Widow, go you along. Lords, use her honourably.
Exeunt all but GLOUCESTER
Ay, Edward will use women honourably.
Would he were wasted, marrow, bones and all,
That from his loins no hopeful branch may spring,
To cross me from the golden time I look for!
And yet, between my soul's desire and me--
The lustful Edward's title buried--
Is Clarence, Henry, and his son young Edward,
And all the unlook'd for issue of their bodies,
To take their rooms, ere I can place myself:
A cold premeditation for my purpose!
Why, then, I do but dream on sovereignty
Like one that stands upon a promontory,
And spies a far-off shore where he would tread,
Wishing his foot were equal with his eye,
And chides the sea that sunders him from thence,
Saying, he'll lade it dry to have his way:
So do I wish the crown, being so far off
And so I chide the means that keeps me from it
And so I say, I'll cut the causes off,
Flattering me with impossibilities.
My eye's too quick, my heart o'erweens too much,
Unless my hand and strength could equal them.
Well, say there is no kingdom then for Richard
What other pleasure can the world afford?
I'll make my heaven in a lady's lap,
And deck my body in gay ornaments,
And witch sweet ladies with my words and looks.
O miserable thought! and more unlikely
Than to accomplish twenty golden crowns!
Why, love forswore me in my  mother's womb:
And, for I should not deal in her soft laws,
She did corrupt frail nature with some bribe,
To shrink mine arm up like a wither'd shrub
To make an envious mountain on my back,
Where sits deformity to mock my body
To shape my legs of an unequal size
To disproportion me in every part,
Like to a chaos, or an unlick'd bear-whelp
That carries no impression like the dam.
And am I then a man to be beloved?
O monstrous fault, to harbour such a thought!
Then, since this earth affords no joy to me,
But to command, to cheque, to o'erbear such
As are of better person than myself,
I'll make my heaven to dream upon the crown,
And, whiles I live, to account this world but hell,
Until my mis-shaped trunk that bears this head
Be round impaled with a glorious crown.
And yet I know not how to get the crown,
For many lives stand between me and home:
And I,--like one lost in a thorny wood,
That rends the thorns and is rent with the thorns,
Seeking a way and straying from the way
Not knowing how to find the open air,
But toiling desperately to find it out,--
Torment myself to catch the English crown:
And from that torment I will free myself,
Or hew my way out with a bloody axe.
Why, I can smile, and murder whiles I smile,
And cry 'Content' to that which grieves my heart,
And wet my cheeks with artificial tears,
And frame my face to all occasions.
I'll drown more sailors than the mermaid shall
I'll slay more gazers than the basilisk
I'll play the orator as well as Nestor,
Deceive more slily than Ulysses could,
And, like a Sinon, take another Troy.
I can add colours to the chameleon,
Change shapes with Proteus for advantages,
And set the murderous Machiavel to school.
Can I do this, and cannot get a crown?
Tut, were it farther off, I'll pluck it down.
Exit
SCENE III. France. KING LEWIS XI's palace.
Flourish. Enter KING LEWIS XI, his sister BONA,  his Admiral, called BOURBON, PRINCE EDWARD, QUEEN  MARGARET, and OXFORD. KING LEWIS XI sits, and riseth up again
Fair Queen of England, worthy Margaret,
Sit down with us: it ill befits thy state
And birth, that thou shouldst stand while Lewis doth sit.
No, mighty King of France: now Margaret
Must strike her sail and learn awhile to serve
Where kings command. I was, I must confess,
Great Albion's queen in former golden days:
But now mischance hath trod my title down,
And with dishonour laid me on the ground
Where I must take like seat unto my fortune,
And to my humble seat conform myself.
Why, say, fair queen, whence springs this deep despair?
From such a cause as fills mine eyes with tears
And stops my tongue, while heart is drown'd in cares.
Whate'er it be, be thou still like thyself,
And sit thee by our side:
Seats her by him
Yield not thy neck
To fortune's yoke, but let thy dauntless mind
Still ride in triumph over all mischance.
Be plain, Queen Margaret, and tell thy grief
It shall be eased, if France can yield relief.
Those gracious words revive my drooping thoughts
And give my tongue-tied sorrows leave to speak.
Now, therefore, be it known to noble Lewis,
That Henry, sole possessor of my love,
Is of a king become a banish'd man,
And forced to live in Scotland a forlorn
While proud ambitious Edward Duke of York
Usurps the regal title and the seat
Of England's true-anointed lawful king.
This is the cause that I, poor Margaret,
With this my son, Prince Edward, Henry's heir,
Am come to crave thy just and lawful aid
And if thou fail us, all our hope is done:
Scotland hath will to help, but cannot help
Our people and our peers are both misled,
Our treasures seized, our soldiers put to flight,
And, as thou seest, ourselves in heavy plight.
Renowned queen, with patience calm the storm,
While we bethink a means to break it off.
The more we stay, the stronger grows our foe.
The more I stay, the more I'll succor thee.
O, but impatience waiteth on true sorrow.
And see where comes the breeder of my sorrow!
Enter WARWICK
What's he approacheth boldly to our presence?
Our Earl of Warwick, Edward's greatest friend.
Welcome, brave Warwick! What brings thee to France?
He descends. She ariseth
Ay, now begins a second storm to rise
For this is he that moves both wind and tide.
From worthy Edward, King of Albion,
My lord and sovereign, and thy vowed friend,
I come, in kindness and unfeigned love,
First, to do greetings to thy royal person
And then to crave a league of amity
And lastly, to confirm that amity
With a nuptial knot, if thou vouchsafe to grant
That virtuous Lady Bona, thy fair sister,
To England's king in lawful marriage.
[Aside]  If that go forward, Henry's hope is done.
[To BONA]  And, gracious madam, in our king's behalf,
I am commanded, with your leave and favour,
Humbly to kiss your hand, and with my tongue
To tell the passion of my sovereign's heart
Where fame, late entering at his heedful ears,
Hath placed thy beauty's image and thy virtue.
King Lewis and Lady Bona, hear me speak,
Before you answer Warwick. His demand
Springs not from Edward's well-meant honest love,
But from deceit bred by necessity
For how can tyrants safely govern home,
Unless abroad they purchase great alliance?
To prove him tyrant this reason may suffice,
That Henry liveth still: but were he dead,
Yet here Prince Edward stands, King Henry's son.
Look, therefore, Lewis, that by this league and marriage
Thou draw not on thy danger and dishonour
For though usurpers sway the rule awhile,
Yet heavens are just, and time suppresseth wrongs.
Injurious Margaret!
And why not queen?
Because thy father Henry did usurp
And thou no more are prince than she is queen.
Then Warwick disannuls great John of Gaunt,
Which did subdue the greatest part of Spain
And, after John of Gaunt, Henry the Fourth,
Whose wisdom was a mirror to the wisest
And, after that wise prince, Henry the Fifth,
Who by his prowess conquered all France:
From these our Henry lineally descends.
Oxford, how haps it, in this smooth discourse,
You told not how Henry the Sixth hath lost
All that which Henry Fifth had gotten?
Methinks these peers of France should smile at that.
But for the rest, you tell a pedigree
Of threescore and two years
To make prescription for a kingdom's worth.
Why, Warwick, canst thou speak against thy liege,
Whom thou obeyed'st thirty and six years,
And not bewray thy treason with a blush?
Can Oxford, that did ever fence the right,
Now buckler falsehood with a pedigree?
For shame! leave Henry, and call Edward king.
Call him my king by whose injurious doom
My elder brother, the Lord Aubrey Vere,
Was done to death? and more than so, my father,
Even in the downfall of his mellow'd years,
When nature brought him to the door of death?
No, Warwick, no
This arm upholds the house of Lancaster.
And I the house of York.
Queen Margaret, Prince Edward, and Oxford,
Vouchsafe, at our request, to stand aside,
While I use further conference with Warwick.
They stand aloof
Heavens grant that Warwick's words bewitch him not!
Now Warwick, tell me, even upon thy conscience,
Is Edward your true king? for I were loath
To link with him that were not lawful chosen.
Thereon I pawn my credit and mine honour.
But is he gracious in the people's eye?
The more that Henry was unfortunate.
Then further, all dissembling set aside,
Tell me for truth the measure of his love
Unto our sister Bona.
Such it seems
As may beseem a monarch like himself.
Myself have often heard him say and swear
That this his love was an eternal plant,
Whereof the root was fix'd in virtue's ground,
The leaves and fruit maintain'd with beauty's sun,
Exempt from envy, but not from disdain,
Unless the Lady Bona quit his pain.
Now, sister, let us hear your firm resolve.
Your grant, or your denial, shall be mine:
To WARWICK
Yet I confess that often ere this day,
When I have heard your king's desert recounted,
Mine ear hath tempted judgment to desire.
Then, Warwick, thus: our sister shall be Edward's
And now forthwith shall articles be drawn
Touching the jointure that your king must make,
Which with her dowry shall be counterpoised.
Draw near, Queen Margaret, and be a witness
That Bona shall be wife to the English king.
To Edward, but not to the English king.
Deceitful Warwick! it was thy device
By this alliance to make void my suit:
Before thy coming Lewis was Henry's friend.
And still is friend to him and Margaret:
But if your title to the crown be weak,
As may appear by Edward's good success,
Then 'tis but reason that I be released
From giving aid which late I promised.
Yet shall you have all kindness at my hand
That your estate requires and mine can yield.
Henry now lives in Scotland at his ease,
Where having nothing, nothing can he lose.
And as for you yourself, our quondam queen,
You have a father able to maintain you
And better 'twere you troubled him than France.
Peace, impudent and shameless Warwick, peace,
Proud setter up and puller down of kings!
I will not hence, till, with my talk and tears,
Both full of truth, I make King Lewis behold
Thy sly conveyance and thy lord's false love
For both of you are birds of selfsame feather.
Post blows a horn within
Warwick, this is some post to us or thee.
Enter a Post
[To WARWICK]  My lord ambassador, these letters are for you,
Sent from your brother, Marquess Montague:
To KING LEWIS XI
These from our king unto your majesty:
To QUEEN MARGARET
And, madam, these for you
They all read their letters
I like it well that our fair queen and mistress
Smiles at her news, while Warwick frowns at his.
Nay, mark how Lewis stamps, as he were nettled:
I hope all's for the best.
Warwick, what are thy news? and yours, fair queen?
Mine, such as fill my heart with unhoped joys.
Mine, full of sorrow and heart's discontent.
What! has your king married the Lady Grey!
And now, to soothe your forgery and his,
Sends me a paper to persuade me patience?
Is this the alliance that he seeks with France?
Dare he presume to scorn us in this manner?
I told your majesty as much before:
This proveth Edward's love and Warwick's honesty.
King Lewis, I here protest, in sight of heaven,
And by the hope I have of heavenly bliss,
That I am clear from this misdeed of Edward's,
No more my king, for he dishonours me,
But most himself, if he could see his shame.
Did I forget that by the house of York
My father came untimely to his death?
Did I let pass the abuse done to my niece?
Did I impale him with the regal crown?
Did I put Henry from his native right?
And am I guerdon'd at the last with shame?
Shame on himself! for my desert is honour:
And to repair my honour lost for him,
I here renounce him and return to Henry.
My noble queen, let former grudges pass,
And henceforth I am thy true servitor:
I will revenge his wrong to Lady Bona,
And replant Henry in his former state.
Warwick, these words have turn'd my hate to love
And I forgive and quite forget old faults,
And joy that thou becomest King Henry's friend.
So much his friend, ay, his unfeigned friend,
That, if King Lewis vouchsafe to furnish us
With some few bands of chosen soldiers,
I'll undertake to land them on our coast
And force the tyrant from his seat by war.
'Tis not his new-made bride shall succor him:
And as for Clarence, as my letters tell me,
He's very likely now to fall from him,
For matching more for wanton lust than honour,
Or than for strength and safety of our country.
Dear brother, how shall Bona be revenged
But by thy help to this distressed queen?
Renowned prince, how shall poor Henry live,
Unless thou rescue him from foul despair?
My quarrel and this English queen's are one.
And mine, fair lady Bona, joins with yours.
And mine with hers, and thine, and Margaret's.
Therefore at last I firmly am resolved
You shall have aid.
Let me give humble thanks for all at once.
Then, England's messenger, return in post,
And tell false Edward, thy supposed king,
That Lewis of France is sending over masquers
To revel it with him and his new bride:
Thou seest what's past, go fear thy king withal.
Tell him, in hope he'll prove a widower shortly,
I'll wear the willow garland for his sake.
Tell him, my mourning weeds are laid aside,
And I am ready to put armour on.
Tell him from me that he hath done me wrong,
And therefore I'll uncrown him ere't be long.
There's thy reward: be gone.
Exit Post
But, Warwick,
Thou and Oxford, with five thousand men,
Shall cross the seas, and bid false Edward battle
And, as occasion serves, this noble queen
And prince shall follow with a fresh supply.
Yet, ere thou go, but answer me one doubt,
What pledge have we of thy firm loyalty?
This shall assure my constant loyalty,
That if our queen and this young prince agree,
I'll join mine eldest daughter and my joy
To him forthwith in holy wedlock bands.
Yes, I agree, and thank you for your motion.
Son Edward, she is fair and virtuous,
Therefore delay not, give thy hand to Warwick
And, with thy hand, thy faith irrevocable,
That only Warwick's daughter shall be thine.
Yes, I accept her, for she well deserves it
And here, to pledge my vow, I give my hand.
He gives his hand to WARWICK
Why stay we now? These soldiers shall be levied,
And thou, Lord Bourbon, our high admiral,
Shalt waft them over with our royal fleet.
I long till Edward fall by war's mischance,
For mocking marriage with a dame of France.
Exeunt all but WARWICK
I came from Edward as ambassador,
But I return his sworn and mortal foe:
Matter of marriage was the charge he gave me,
But dreadful war shall answer his demand.
Had he none else to make a stale but me?
Then none but I shall turn his jest to sorrow.
I was the chief that raised him to the crown,
And I'll be chief to bring him down again:
Not that I pity Henry's misery,
But seek revenge on Edward's mockery.
Exit
ACT IV
SCENE I. London. The palace.
Enter GLOUCESTER, CLARENCE, SOMERSET, and MONTAGUE
Now tell me, brother Clarence, what think you
Of this new marriage with the Lady Grey?
Hath not our brother made a worthy choice?
Alas, you know, 'tis far from hence to France
How could he stay till Warwick made return?
My lords, forbear this talk
And his well-chosen bride.
I mind to tell him plainly what I think.
Flourish. Enter KING EDWARD IV, attended
Now, brother of Clarence, how like you our choice,
That you stand pensive, as half malcontent?
As well as Lewis of France, or the Earl of Warwick,
Which are so weak of courage and in judgment
That they'll take no offence at our abuse.
Suppose they take offence without a cause,
They are but Lewis and Warwick: I am Edward,
Your king and Warwick's, and must have my will.
And shall have your will, because our king:
Yet hasty marriage seldom proveth well.
Yea, brother Richard, are you offended too?
Not I:
No, God forbid that I should wish them sever'd
Whom God hath join'd together
To sunder them that yoke so well together.
Setting your scorns and your mislike aside,
Tell me some reason why the Lady Grey
Should not become my wife and England's queen.
And you too, Somerset and Montague,
Speak freely what you think.
Then this is mine opinion: that King Lewis
Becomes your enemy, for mocking him
About the marriage of the Lady Bona.
And Warwick, doing what you gave in charge,
Is now dishonoured by this new marriage.
What if both Lewis and Warwick be appeased
By such invention as I can devise?
Yet, to have join'd with France in such alliance
Would more have strengthen'd this our commonwealth
'Gainst foreign storms than any home-bred marriage.
Why, knows not Montague that of itself
England is safe, if true within itself?
But the safer when 'tis back'd with France.
'Tis better using France than trusting France:
Let us be back'd with God and with the seas
Which He hath given for fence impregnable,
And with their helps only defend ourselves
In them and in ourselves our safety lies.
For this one speech Lord Hastings well deserves
To have the heir of the Lord Hungerford.
Ay, what of that? it was my will and grant
And for this once my will shall stand for law.
And yet methinks your grace hath not done well,
To give the heir and daughter of Lord Scales
Unto the brother of your loving bride
She better would have fitted me or Clarence:
But in your bride you bury brotherhood.
Or else you would not have bestow'd the heir
Of the Lord Bonville on your new wife's son,
And leave your brothers to go speed elsewhere.
Alas, poor Clarence! is it for a wife
That thou art malcontent? I will provide thee.
In choosing for yourself, you show'd your judgment,
Which being shallow, you give me leave
To play the broker in mine own behalf
And to that end I shortly mind to leave you.
Leave me, or tarry, Edward will be king,
And not be tied unto his brother's will.
My lords, before it pleased his majesty
To raise my state to title of a queen,
Do me but right, and you must all confess
That I was not ignoble of descent
And meaner than myself have had like fortune.
But as this title honours me and mine,
So your dislike, to whom I would be pleasing,
Doth cloud my joys with danger and with sorrow.
My love, forbear to fawn upon their frowns:
What danger or what sorrow can befall thee,
So long as Edward is thy constant friend,
And their true sovereign, whom they must obey?
Nay, whom they shall obey, and love thee too,
Unless they seek for hatred at my hands
Which if they do, yet will I keep thee safe,
And they shall feel the vengeance of my wrath.
[Aside]  I hear, yet say not much, but think the more.
Enter a Post
Now, messenger, what letters or what news
From France?
My sovereign liege, no letters
But such as I, without your special pardon,
Dare not relate.
Go to, we pardon thee: therefore, in brief,
Tell me their words as near as thou canst guess them.
What answer makes King Lewis unto our letters?
At my depart, these were his very words:
'Go tell false Edward, thy supposed king,
That Lewis of France is sending over masquers
To revel it with him and his new bride.'
Is Lewis so brave? belike he thinks me Henry.
But what said Lady Bona to my marriage?
These were her words, utter'd with mad disdain:
'Tell him, in hope he'll prove a widower shortly,
I'll wear the willow garland for his sake.'
I blame not her, she could say little less
She had the wrong. But what said Henry's queen?
For I have heard that she was there in place.
'Tell him,' quoth she, 'my mourning weeds are done,
And I am ready to put armour on.'
Belike she minds to play the Amazon.
But what said Warwick to these injuries?
He, more incensed against your majesty
Than all the rest, discharged me with these words:
'Tell him from me that he hath done me wrong,
And therefore I'll uncrown him ere't be long.'
Ha! durst the traitor breathe out so proud words?
Well I will arm me, being thus forewarn'd:
They shall have wars and pay for their presumption.
But say, is Warwick friends with Margaret?
Ay, gracious sovereign
friendship
That young Prince Edward marries Warwick's daughter.
Belike the elder
Now, brother king, farewell, and sit you fast,
For I will hence to Warwick's other daughter
That, though I want a kingdom, yet in marriage
I may not prove inferior to yourself.
You that love me and Warwick, follow me.
Exit CLARENCE, and SOMERSET follows
[Aside]  Not I:
My thoughts aim at a further matter
Stay not for the love of Edward, but the crown.
Clarence and Somerset both gone to Warwick!
Yet am I arm'd against the worst can happen
And haste is needful in this desperate case.
Pembroke and Stafford, you in our behalf
Go levy men, and make prepare for war
They are already, or quickly will be landed:
Myself in person will straight follow you.
Exeunt PEMBROKE and STAFFORD
But, ere I go, Hastings and Montague,
Resolve my doubt. You twain, of all the rest,
Are near to Warwick by blood and by alliance:
Tell me if you love Warwick more than me?
If it be so, then both depart to him
I rather wish you foes than hollow friends:
But if you mind to hold your true obedience,
Give me assurance with some friendly vow,
That I may never have you in suspect.
So God help Montague as he proves true!
And Hastings as he favours Edward's cause!
Now, brother Richard, will you stand by us?
Ay, in despite of all that shall withstand you.
Why, so! then am I sure of victory.
Now therefore let us hence
Till we meet Warwick with his foreign power.
Exeunt
SCENE II. A plain in Warwickshire.
Enter WARWICK and OXFORD, with French soldiers
Trust me, my lord, all hitherto goes well
The common people by numbers swarm to us.
Enter CLARENCE and SOMERSET
But see where Somerset and Clarence come!
Speak suddenly, my lords, are we all friends?
Fear not that, my lord.
Then, gentle Clarence, welcome unto Warwick
And welcome, Somerset: I hold it cowardice
To rest mistrustful where a noble heart
Hath pawn'd an open hand in sign of love
Else might I think that Clarence, Edward's brother,
Were but a feigned friend to our proceedings:
But welcome, sweet Clarence
And now what rests but, in night's coverture,
Thy brother being carelessly encamp'd,
His soldiers lurking in the towns about,
And but attended by a simple guard,
We may surprise and take him at our pleasure?
Our scouts have found the adventure very easy:
That as Ulysses and stout Diomede
With sleight and manhood stole to Rhesus' tents,
And brought from thence the Thracian fatal steeds,
So we, well cover'd with the night's black mantle,
At unawares may beat down Edward's guard
And seize himself
For I intend but only to surprise him.
You that will follow me to this attempt,
Applaud the name of Henry with your leader.
They all cry, 'Henry!'
Why, then, let's on our way in silent sort:
For Warwick and his friends, God and Saint George!
Exeunt
SCENE III. Edward's camp, near Warwick.
Enter three Watchmen, to guard KING EDWARD IV's tent
Come on, my masters, each man take his stand:
The king by this is set him down to sleep.
What, will he not to bed?
Why, no
Never to lie and take his natural rest
Till Warwick or himself be quite suppress'd.
To-morrow then belike shall be the day,
If Warwick be so near as men report.
But say, I pray, what nobleman is that
That with the king here resteth in his tent?
'Tis the Lord Hastings, the king's chiefest friend.
O, is it so? But why commands the king
That his chief followers lodge in towns about him,
While he himself keeps in the cold field?
'Tis the more honour, because more dangerous.
Ay, but give me worship and quietness
I like it better than a dangerous honour.
If Warwick knew in what estate he stands,
'Tis to be doubted he would waken him.
Unless our halberds did shut up his passage.
Ay, wherefore else guard we his royal tent,
But to defend his person from night-foes?
Enter WARWICK, CLARENCE, OXFORD, SOMERSET, and French soldiers, silent all
This is his tent
Courage, my masters! honour now or never!
But follow me, and Edward shall be ours.
Who goes there?
Stay, or thou diest!
WARWICK and the rest cry all, 'Warwick! Warwick!'  and set upon the Guard, who fly, crying, 'Arm! arm!' WARWICK and the rest following them
The drum playing and trumpet sounding, reenter  WARWICK, SOMERSET, and the rest, bringing KING  EDWARD IV out in his gown, sitting in a chair. RICHARD and HASTINGS fly over the stage
What are they that fly there?
Richard and Hastings: let them go
The duke! Why, Warwick, when we parted,
Thou call'dst me king.
Ay, but the case is alter'd:
When you disgraced me in my embassade,
Then I degraded you from being king,
And come now to create you Duke of York.
Alas! how should you govern any kingdom,
That know not how to use ambassadors,
Nor how to be contented with one wife,
Nor how to use your brothers brotherly,
Nor how to study for the people's welfare,
Nor how to shroud yourself from enemies?
Yea, brother of Clarence, are thou here too?
Nay, then I see that Edward needs must down.
Yet, Warwick, in despite of all mischance,
Of thee thyself and all thy complices,
Edward will always bear himself as king:
Though fortune's malice overthrow my state,
My mind exceeds the compass of her wheel.
Then, for his mind, be Edward England's king:
Takes off his crown
But Henry now shall wear the English crown,
And be true king indeed, thou but the shadow.
My Lord of Somerset, at my request,
See that forthwith Duke Edward be convey'd
Unto my brother, Archbishop of York.
When I have fought with Pembroke and his fellows,
I'll follow you, and tell what answer
Lewis and the Lady Bona send to him.
Now, for a while farewell, good Duke of York.
They lead him out forcibly
What fates impose, that men must needs abide
It boots not to resist both wind and tide.
Exit, guarded
What now remains, my lords, for us to do
But march to London with our soldiers?
Ay, that's the first thing that we have to do
To free King Henry from imprisonment
And see him seated in the regal throne.
Exeunt
SCENE IV. London. The palace.
Enter QUEEN ELIZABETH and RIVERS
Madam, what makes you in this sudden change?
Why brother Rivers, are you yet to learn
What late misfortune is befall'n King Edward?
What! loss of some pitch'd battle against Warwick?
No, but the loss of his own royal person.
Then is my sovereign slain?
Ay, almost slain, for he is taken prisoner,
Either betray'd by falsehood of his guard
Or by his foe surprised at unawares:
And, as I further have to understand,
Is new committed to the Bishop of York,
Fell Warwick's brother and by that our foe.
These news I must confess are full of grief
Yet, gracious madam, bear it as you may:
Warwick may lose, that now hath won the day.
Till then fair hope must hinder life's decay.
And I the rather wean me from despair
For love of Edward's offspring in my womb:
This is it that makes me bridle passion
And bear with mildness my misfortune's cross
Ay, ay, for this I draw in many a tear
And stop the rising of blood-sucking sighs,
Lest with my sighs or tears I blast or drown
King Edward's fruit, true heir to the English crown.
But, madam, where is Warwick then become?
I am inform'd that he comes towards London,
To set the crown once more on Henry's head:
Guess thou the rest
But, to prevent the tyrant's violence,--
For trust not him that hath once broken faith,--
I'll hence forthwith unto the sanctuary,
To save at least the heir of Edward's right:
There shall I rest secure from force and fraud.
Come, therefore, let us fly while we may fly:
If Warwick take us we are sure to die.
Exeunt
SCENE V. A park near Middleham Castle In Yorkshire.
Enter GLOUCESTER, HASTINGS, and STANLEY
Now, my Lord Hastings and Sir William Stanley,
Leave off to wonder why I drew you hither,
Into this chiefest thicket of the park.
Thus stands the case: you know our king, my brother,
Is prisoner to the bishop here, at whose hands
He hath good usage and great liberty,
And, often but attended with weak guard,
Comes hunting this way to disport himself.
I have advertised him by secret means
That if about this hour he make his way
Under the colour of his usual game,
He shall here find his friends with horse and men
To set him free from his captivity.
Enter KING EDWARD IV and a Huntsman with him
This way, my lord
Nay, this way, man: see where the huntsmen stand.
Now, brother of Gloucester, Lord Hastings, and the rest,
Stand you thus close, to steal the bishop's deer?
Brother, the time and case requireth haste:
Your horse stands ready at the park-corner.
But whither shall we then?
To Lynn, my lord,
And ship from thence to Flanders.
Well guess'd, believe me
Stanley, I will requite thy forwardness.
But wherefore stay we? 'tis no time to talk.
Huntsman, what say'st thou? wilt thou go along?
Better do so than tarry and be hang'd.
Come then, away
Bishop, farewell: shield thee from Warwick's frown
And pray that I may repossess the crown.
Exeunt
SCENE VI. London. The Tower.
Flourish. Enter KING HENRY VI, CLARENCE, WARWICK,  SOMERSET, HENRY OF RICHMOND, OXFORD, MONTAGUE, and Lieutenant of the Tower
Master lieutenant, now that God and friends
Have shaken Edward from the regal seat,
And turn'd my captive state to liberty,
My fear to hope, my sorrows unto joys,
At our enlargement what are thy due fees?
Subjects may challenge nothing of their sovereigns
But if an humble prayer may prevail,
I then crave pardon of your majesty.
For what, lieutenant? for well using me?
Nay, be thou sure I'll well requite thy kindness,
For that it made my imprisonment a pleasure
Ay, such a pleasure as incaged birds
Conceive when after many moody thoughts
At last by notes of household harmony
They quite forget their loss of liberty.
But, Warwick, after God, thou set'st me free,
And chiefly therefore I thank God and thee
He was the author, thou the instrument.
Therefore, that I may conquer fortune's spite
By living low, where fortune cannot hurt me,
And that the people of this blessed land
May not be punish'd with my thwarting stars,
Warwick, although my head still wear the crown,
I here resign my government to thee,
For thou art fortunate in all thy deeds.
Your grace hath still been famed for virtuous
And now may seem as wise as virtuous,
By spying and avoiding fortune's malice,
For few men rightly temper with the stars:
Yet in this one thing let me blame your grace,
For choosing me when Clarence is in place.
No, Warwick, thou art worthy of the sway,
To whom the heavens in thy nativity
Adjudged an olive branch and laurel crown,
As likely to be blest in peace and war
And therefore I yield thee my free consent.
And I choose Clarence only for protector.
Warwick and Clarence give me both your hands:
Now join your hands, and with your hands your hearts,
That no dissension hinder government:
I make you both protectors of this land,
While I myself will lead a private life
And in devotion spend my latter days,
To sin's rebuke and my Creator's praise.
What answers Clarence to his sovereign's will?
That he consents, if Warwick yield consent
For on thy fortune I repose myself.
Why, then, though loath, yet must I be content:
We'll yoke together, like a double shadow
To Henry's body, and supply his place
I mean, in bearing weight of government,
While he enjoys the honour and his ease.
And, Clarence, now then it is more than needful
Forthwith that Edward be pronounced a traitor,
And all his lands and goods be confiscate.
What else? and that succession be determined.
Ay, therein Clarence shall not want his part.
But, with the first of all your chief affairs,
Let me entreat, for I command no more,
That Margaret your queen and my son Edward
Be sent for, to return from France with speed
For, till I see them here, by doubtful fear
My joy of liberty is half eclipsed.
It shall be done, my sovereign, with all speed.
My Lord of Somerset, what youth is that,
Of whom you seem to have so tender care?
My liege, it is young Henry, earl of Richmond.
Come hither, England's hope.
Lays his hand on his head
If secret powers
Suggest but truth to my divining thoughts,
This pretty lad will prove our country's bliss.
His looks are full of peaceful majesty,
His head by nature framed to wear a crown,
His hand to wield a sceptre, and himself
Likely in time to bless a regal throne.
Make much of him, my lords, for this is he
Must help you more than you are hurt by me.
Enter a Post
What news, my friend?
That Edward is escaped from your brother,
And fled, as he hears since, to Burgundy.
Unsavoury news! but how made he escape?
He was convey'd by Richard Duke of Gloucester
And the Lord Hastings, who attended him
In secret ambush on the forest side
And from the bishop's huntsmen rescued him
For hunting was his daily exercise.
My brother was too careless of his charge.
But let us hence, my sovereign, to provide
A salve for any sore that may betide.
Exeunt all but SOMERSET, HENRY OF RICHMOND, and OXFORD
My lord, I like not of this flight of Edward's
For doubtless Burgundy will yield him help,
And we shall have more wars before 't be long.
As Henry's late presaging prophecy
Did glad my heart with hope of this young Richmond,
So doth my heart misgive me, in these conflicts
What may befall him, to his harm and ours:
Therefore, Lord Oxford, to prevent the worst,
Forthwith we'll send him hence to Brittany,
Till storms be past of civil enmity.
Ay, for if Edward repossess the crown,
'Tis like that Richmond with the rest shall down.
It shall be so
Come, therefore, let's about it speedily.
Exeunt
SCENE VII. Before York.
Flourish. Enter KING EDWARD IV, GLOUCESTER, HASTINGS, and Soldiers
Now, brother Richard, Lord Hastings, and the rest,
Yet thus far fortune maketh us amends,
And says that once more I shall interchange
My waned state for Henry's regal crown.
Well have we pass'd and now repass'd the seas
And brought desired help from Burgundy:
What then remains, we being thus arrived
From Ravenspurgh haven before the gates of York,
But that we enter, as into our dukedom?
The gates made fast! Brother, I like not this
For many men that stumble at the threshold
Are well foretold that danger lurks within.
Tush, man, abodements must not now affright us:
By fair or foul means we must enter in,
For hither will our friends repair to us.
My liege, I'll knock once more to summon them.
Enter, on the walls, the Mayor of York, and his Brethren
My lords, we were forewarned of your coming,
And shut the gates for safety of ourselves
For now we owe allegiance unto Henry.
But, master mayor, if Henry be your king,
Yet Edward at the least is Duke of York.
True, my good lord
Why, and I challenge nothing but my dukedom,
As being well content with that alone.
[Aside]  But when the fox hath once got in his nose,
He'll soon find means to make the body follow.
Why, master mayor, why stand you in a doubt?
Open the gates
Ay, say you so? the gates shall then be open'd.
They descend
A wise stout captain, and soon persuaded!
The good old man would fain that all were well,
So 'twere not 'long of him
I doubt not, I, but we shall soon persuade
Both him and all his brothers unto reason.
Enter the Mayor and two Aldermen, below
So, master mayor: these gates must not be shut
But in the night or in the time of war.
What! fear not, man, but yield me up the keys
Takes his keys
For Edward will defend the town and thee,
And all those friends that deign to follow me.
March. Enter MONTGOMERY, with drum and soldiers
Brother, this is Sir John Montgomery,
Our trusty friend, unless I be deceived.
Welcome, Sir John! But why come you in arms?
To help King Edward in his time of storm,
As every loyal subject ought to do.
Thanks, good Montgomery
Our title to the crown and only claim
Our dukedom till God please to send the rest.
Then fare you well, for I will hence again:
I came to serve a king and not a duke.
Drummer, strike up, and let us march away.
The drum begins to march
Nay, stay, Sir John, awhi le, and we'll debate
By what safe means the crown may be recover'd.
What talk you of debating? in few words,
If you'll not here proclaim yourself our king,
I'll leave you to your fortune and be gone
To keep them back that come to succor you:
Why shall we fight, if you pretend no title?
Why, brother, wherefore stand you on nice points?
When we grow stronger, then we'll make our claim:
Till then, 'tis wisdom to conceal our meaning.
Away with scrupulous wit! now arms must rule.
And fearless minds climb soonest unto crowns.
Brother, we will proclaim you out of hand:
The bruit thereof will bring you many friends.
Then be it as you will
And Henry but usurps the diadem.
Ay, now my sovereign speaketh like himself
And now will I be Edward's champion.
Sound trumpet
Come, fellow-soldier, make thou proclamation.
Flourish
Edward the Fourth, by the grace of God, king of
England and France, and lord of Ireland,  and c.
And whosoe'er gainsays King Edward's right,
By this I challenge him to single fight.
Throws down his gauntlet
Long live Edward the Fourth!
Thanks, brave Montgomery
If fortune serve me, I'll requite this kindness.
Now, for this night, let's harbour here in York
And when the morning sun shall raise his car
Above the border of this horizon,
We'll forward towards Warwick and his mates
For well I wot that Henry is no soldier.
Ah, froward Clarence! how evil it beseems thee
To flatter Henry and forsake thy brother!
Yet, as we may, we'll meet both thee and Warwick.
Come on, brave soldiers: doubt not of the day,
And, that once gotten, doubt not of large pay.
Exeunt
SCENE VIII. London. The palace.
Flourish. Enter KING HENRY VI, WARWICK, MONTAGUE, CLARENCE, EXETER, and OXFORD
What counsel, lords? Edward from Belgia,
With hasty Germans and blunt Hollanders,
Hath pass'd in safety through the narrow seas,
And with his troops doth march amain to London
And many giddy people flock to him.
Let's levy men, and beat him back again.
A little fire is quickly trodden out
Which, being suffer'd, rivers cannot quench.
In Warwickshire I have true-hearted friends,
Not mutinous in peace, yet bold in war
Those will I muster up: and thou, son Clarence,
Shalt stir up in Suffolk, Norfolk, and in Kent,
The knights and gentlemen to come with thee:
Thou, brother Montague, in Buckingham,
Northampton and in Leicestershire, shalt find
Men well inclined to hear what thou command'st:
And thou, brave Oxford, wondrous well beloved,
In Oxfordshire shalt muster up thy friends.
My sovereign, with the loving citizens,
Like to his island girt in with the ocean,
Or modest Dian circled with her nymphs,
Shall rest in London till we come to him.
Fair lords, take leave and stand not to reply.
Farewell, my sovereign.
Farewell, my Hector, and my Troy's true hope.
In sign of truth, I kiss your highness' hand.
Well-minded Clarence, be thou fortunate!
Comfort, my lord
And thus I seal my truth, and bid adieu.
Sweet Oxford, and my loving Montague,
And all at once, once more a happy farewell.
Farewell, sweet lords: let's meet at Coventry.
Exeunt all but KING HENRY VI and EXETER
Here at the palace I will rest awhile.
Cousin of Exeter, what thinks your lordship?
Methinks the power that Edward hath in field
Should not be able to encounter mine.
The doubt is that he will seduce the rest.
That's not my fear
I have not stopp'd mine ears to their demands,
Nor posted off their suits with slow delays
My pity hath been balm to heal their wounds,
My mildness hath allay'd their swelling griefs,
My mercy dried their water-flowing tears
I have not been desirous of their wealth,
Nor much oppress'd them with great subsidies.
Nor forward of revenge, though they much err'd:
Then why should they love Edward more than me?
No, Exeter, these graces challenge grace:
And when the lion fawns upon the lamb,
The lamb will never cease to follow him.
Shout within. 'A Lancaster! A Lancaster!'
Hark, hark, my lord! what shouts are these?
Enter KING EDWARD IV, GLOUCESTER, and soldiers
Seize on the shame-faced Henry, bear him hence
And once again proclaim us King of England.
You are the fount that makes small brooks to flow:
Now stops thy spring
And swell so much the higher by their ebb.
Hence with him to the Tower
Exeunt some with KING HENRY VI
And, lords, towards Coventry bend we our course
Where peremptory Warwick now remains:
The sun shines hot
Cold biting winter mars our hoped-for hay.
Away betimes, before his forces join,
And take the great-grown traitor unawares:
Brave warriors, march amain towards Coventry.
Exeunt
ACT V
SCENE I. Coventry.
Enter WARWICK, the Mayor of Coventry, two Messengers, and others upon the walls
Where is the post that came from valiant Oxford?
How far hence is thy lord, mine honest fellow?
By this at Dunsmore, marching hitherward.
How far off is our brother Montague?
Where is the post that came from Montague?
By this at Daintry, with a puissant troop.
Enter SIR JOHN SOMERVILLE
Say, Somerville, what says my loving son?
And, by thy guess, how nigh is Clarence now?
At Southam I did leave him with his forces,
And do expect him here some two hours hence.
Drum heard
Then Clarence is at hand, I hear his drum.
It is not his, my lord
The drum your honour hears marcheth from Warwick.
Who should that be? belike, unlook'd-for friends.
They are at hand, and you shall quickly know.
March: flourish. Enter KING EDWARD IV, GLOUCESTER, and soldiers
Go, trumpet, to the walls, and sound a parle.
See how the surly Warwick mans the wall!
O unbid spite! is sportful Edward come?
Where slept our scouts, or how are they seduced,
That we could hear no news of his repair?
Now, Warwick, wilt thou ope the city gates,
Speak gentle words and humbly bend thy knee,
Call Edward king and at his hands beg mercy?
And he shall pardon thee these outrages.
Nay, rather, wilt thou draw thy forces hence,
Confess who set thee up and pluck'd thee own,
Call Warwick patron and be penitent?
And thou shalt still remain the Duke of York.
I thought, at least, he would have said the king
Or did he make the jest against his will?
Is not a dukedom, sir, a goodly gift?
Ay, by my faith, for a poor earl to give:
I'll do thee service for so good a gift.
'Twas I that gave the kingdom to thy brother.
Why then 'tis mine, if but by Warwick's gift.
Thou art no Atlas for so great a weight:
And weakling, Warwick takes his gift again
And Henry is my king, Warwick his subject.
But Warwick's king is Edward's prisoner:
And, gallant Warwick, do but answer this:
What is the body when the head is off?
Alas, that Warwick had no more forecast,
But, whiles he thought to steal the single ten,
The king was slily finger'd from the deck!
You left poor Henry at the Bishop's palace,
And, ten to one, you'll meet him in the Tower.
'Tis even so
Come, Warwick, take the time
Nay, when? strike now, or else the iron cools.
I had rather chop this hand off at a blow,
And with the other fling it at thy face,
Than bear so low a sail, to strike to thee.
Sail how thou canst, have wind and tide thy friend,
This hand, fast wound about thy coal-black hair
Shall, whiles thy head is warm and new cut off,
Write in the dust this sentence with thy blood,
'Wind-changing Warwick now can change no more.'
Enter OXFORD, with drum and colours
O cheerful colours! see where Oxford comes!
Oxford, Oxford, for Lancaster!
He and his forces enter the city
The gates are open, let us enter too.
So other foes may set upon our backs.
Stand we in good array
Will issue out again and bid us battle:
If not, the city being but of small defence,
We'll quickly rouse the traitors in the same.
O, welcome, Oxford! for we want thy help.
Enter MONTAGUE with drum and colours
Montague, Montague, for Lancaster!
He and his forces enter the city
Thou and thy brother both shall buy this treason
Even with the dearest blood your bodies bear.
The harder match'd, the greater victory:
My mind presageth happy gain and conquest.
Enter SOMERSET, with drum and colours
Somerset, Somerset, for Lancaster!
He and his forces enter the city
Two of thy name, both Dukes of Somerset,
Have sold their lives unto the house of York
And thou shalt be the third if this sword hold.
Enter CLARENCE, with drum and colours
And lo, where George of Clarence sweeps along,
Of force enough to bid his brother battle
With whom an upright zeal to right prevails
More than the nature of a brother's love!
Come, Clarence, come
Father of Warwick, know you what this means?
Taking his red rose out of his hat
Look here, I throw my infamy at thee
I will not ruinate my father's house,
Who gave his blood to lime the stones together,
And set up Lancaster. Why, trow'st thou, Warwick,
That Clarence is so harsh, so blunt, unnatural,
To bend the fatal instruments of war
Against his brother and his lawful king?
Perhaps thou wilt object my holy oath:
To keep that oath were more impiety
Than Jephthah's, when he sacrificed his daughter.
I am so sorry for my trespass made
That, to deserve well at my brother's hands,
I here proclaim myself thy mortal foe,
With resolution, wheresoe'er I meet thee--
As I will meet thee, if thou stir abroad--
To plague thee for thy foul misleading me.
And so, proud-hearted Warwick, I defy thee,
And to my brother turn my blushing cheeks.
Pardon me, Edward, I will make amends:
And, Richard, do not frown upon my faults,
For I will henceforth be no more unconstant.
Now welcome more, and ten times more beloved,
Than if thou never hadst deserved our hate.
Welcome, good Clarence
O passing traitor, perjured and unjust!
What, Warwick, wilt thou leave the town and fight?
Or shall we beat the stones about thine ears?
Alas, I am not coop'd here for defence!
I will away towards Barnet presently,
And bid thee battle, Edward, if thou darest.
Yes, Warwick, Edward dares, and leads the way.
Lords, to the field
Exeunt King Edward and his company. March. Warwick and his company follow
SCENE II. A field of battle near Barnet.
Alarum and excursions. Enter KING EDWARD IV, bringing forth WARWICK wounded
So, lie thou there: die thou, and die our fear
For Warwick was a bug that fear'd us all.
Now, Montague, sit fast
That Warwick's bones may keep thine company.
Exit
Ah, who is nigh? come to me, friend or foe,
And tell me who is victor, York or Warwick?
Why ask I that? my mangled body shows,
My blood, my want of strength, my sick heart shows.
That I must yield my body to the earth
And, by my fall, the conquest to my foe.
Thus yields the cedar to the axe's edge,
Whose arms gave shelter to the princely eagle,
Under whose shade the ramping lion slept,
Whose top-branch overpeer'd Jove's spreading tree
And kept low shrubs from winter's powerful wind.
These eyes, that now are dimm'd with death's black veil,
Have been as piercing as the mid-day sun,
To search the secret treasons of the world:
The wrinkles in my brows, now filled with blood,
Were liken'd oft to kingly sepulchres
For who lived king, but I could dig his grave?
And who durst mine when Warwick bent his brow?
Lo, now my glory smear'd in dust and blood!
My parks, my walks, my manors that I had.
Even now forsake me, and of all my lands
Is nothing left me but my body's length.
Why, what is pomp, rule, reign, but earth and dust?
And, live we how we can, yet die we must.
Enter OXFORD and SOMERSET
Ah, Warwick, Warwick! wert thou as we are.
We might recover all our loss again
The queen from France hath brought a puissant power:
Even now we heard the news: ah, could'st thou fly!
Why, then I would not fly. Ah, Montague,
If thou be there, sweet brother, take my hand.
And with thy lips keep in my soul awhile!
Thou lovest me not
Thy tears would wash this cold congealed blood
That glues my lips and will not let me speak.
Come quickly, Montague, or I am dead.
Ah, Warwick! Montague hath breathed his last
And to the latest gasp cried out for Warwick,
And said 'Commend me to my valiant brother.'
And more he would have said, and more he spoke,
Which sounded like a clamour in a vault,
That mought not be distinguished
I well might hear, delivered with a groan,
'O, farewell, Warwick!'
Sweet rest his soul! Fly, lords, and save yourselves
For Warwick bids you all farewell to meet in heaven.
Dies
Away, away, to meet the queen's great power!
Here they bear away his body. Exeunt
SCENE III. Another part of the field.
Flourish. Enter KING EDWARD IV in triumph
Thus far our fortune keeps an upward course,
And we are graced with wreaths of victory.
But, in the midst of this bright-shining day,
I spy a black, suspicious, threatening cloud,
That will encounter with our glorious sun,
Ere he attain his easeful western bed:
I mean, my lords, those powers that the queen
Hath raised in Gallia have arrived our coast
And, as we hear, march on to fight with us.
A little gale will soon disperse that cloud
And blow it to the source from whence it came:
The very beams will dry those vapours up,
For every cloud engenders not a storm.
The queen is valued thirty thousand strong,
And Somerset, with Oxford fled to her:
If she have time to breathe be well assured
Her faction will be full as strong as ours.
We are advertised by our loving friends
That they do hold their course toward Tewksbury:
We, having now the best at Barnet field,
Will thither straight, for willingness rids way
And, as we march, our strength will be augmented
In every county as we go along.
Strike up the drum
Exeunt
SCENE IV. Plains near Tewksbury.
March. Enter QUEEN MARGARET, PRINCE EDWARD, SOMERSET, OXFORD, and soldiers
Great lords, wise men ne'er sit and wail their loss,
But cheerly seek how to redress their harms.
What though the mast be now blown overboard,
The cable broke, the holding-anchor lost,
And half our sailors swallow'd in the flood?
Yet lives our pilot still. Is't meet that he
Should leave the helm and like a fearful lad
With tearful eyes add water to the sea
And give more strength to that which hath too much,
Whiles, in his moan, the ship splits on the rock,
Which industry and courage might have saved?
Ah, what a shame! ah, what a fault were this!
Say Warwick was our anchor
And Montague our topmost
Our slaughter'd friends the tackles
Why, is not Oxford here another anchor?
And Somerset another goodly mast?
The friends of France our shrouds and tacklings?
And, though unskilful, why not Ned and I
For once allow'd the skilful pilot's charge?
We will not from the helm to sit and weep,
But keep our course, though the rough wind say no,
From shelves and rocks that threaten us with wreck.
As good to chide the waves as speak them fair.
And what is Edward but ruthless sea?
What Clarence but a quicksand of deceit?
And Richard but a ragged fatal rock?
All these the enemies to our poor bark.
Say you can swim
Tread on the sand
Bestride the rock
Or else you famish
This speak I, lords, to let you understand,
If case some one of you would fly from us,
That there's no hoped-for mercy with the brothers
More than with ruthless waves, with sands and rocks.
Why, courage then! what cannot be avoided
'Twere childish weakness to lament or fear.
Methinks a woman of this valiant spirit
Should, if a coward heard her speak these words,
Infuse his breast with magnanimity
And make him, naked, foil a man at arms.
I speak not this as doubting any here
For did I but suspect a fearful man
He should have leave to go away betimes,
Lest in our need he might infect another
And make him of like spirit to himself.
If any such be here--as God forbid!--
Let him depart before we need his help.
Women and children of so high a courage,
And warriors faint! why, 'twere perpetual shame.
O brave young prince! thy famous grandfather
Doth live again in thee: long mayst thou live
To bear his image and renew his glories!
And he that will not fight for such a hope.
Go home to bed, and like the owl by day,
If he arise, be mock'd and wonder'd at.
Thanks, gentle Somerset
And take his thanks that yet hath nothing else.
Enter a Messenger
Prepare you, lords, for Edward is at hand.
Ready to fight
I thought no less: it is his policy
To haste thus fast, to find us unprovided.
But he's deceived
This cheers my heart, to see your forwardness.
Here pitch our battle
Flourish and march. Enter KING EDWARD IV, GLOUCESTER, CLARENCE, and soldiers
Brave followers, yonder stands the thorny wood,
Which, by the heavens' assistance and your strength,
Must by the roots be hewn up yet ere night.
I need not add more fuel to your fire,
For well I wot ye blaze to burn them out
Give signal to the fight, and to it, lords!
Lords, knights, and gentlemen, what I should say
My tears gainsay
Ye see, I drink the water of mine eyes.
Therefore, no more but this: Henry, your sovereign,
Is prisoner to the foe
His realm a slaughter-house, his subjects slain,
His statutes cancell'd and his treasure spent
And yonder is the wolf that makes this spoil.
You fight in justice: then, in God's name, lords,
Be valiant and give signal to the fight.
Alarum. Retreat. Excursions. Exeunt
SCENE V. Another part of the field.
Flourish. Enter KING EDWARD IV, GLOUCESTER, CLARENCE,  and soldiers
Now here a period of tumultuous broils.
Away with Oxford to Hames Castle straight:
For Somerset, off with his guilty head.
Go, bear them hence
For my part, I'll not trouble thee with words.
Nor I, but stoop with patience to my fortune.
Exeunt Oxford and Somerset, guarded
So part we sadly in this troublous world,
To meet with joy in sweet Jerusalem.
Is proclamation made, that who finds Edward
Shall have a high reward, and he his life?
It is: and lo, where youthful Edward comes!
Enter soldiers, with PRINCE EDWARD
Bring forth the gallant, let us hear him speak.
What! can so young a thorn begin to prick?
Edward, what satisfaction canst thou make
For bearing arms, for stirring up my subjects,
And all the trouble thou hast turn'd me to?
Speak like a subject, proud ambitious York!
Suppose that I am now my father's mouth
Resign thy chair, and where I stand kneel thou,
Whilst I propose the selfsame words to thee,
Which traitor, thou wouldst have me answer to.
Ah, that thy father had been so resolved!
That you might still have worn the petticoat,
And ne'er have stol'n the breech from Lancaster.
Let AEsop fable in a winter's night
His currish riddles sort not with this place.
By heaven, brat, I'll plague ye for that word.
Ay, thou wast born to be a plague to men.
For God's sake, take away this captive scold.
Nay, take away this scolding crookback rather.
Peace, wilful boy, or I will charm your tongue.
Untutor'd lad, thou art too malapert.
I know my duty
Lascivious Edward, and thou perjured George,
And thou mis-shapen Dick, I tell ye all
I am your better, traitors as ye are:
And thou usurp'st my father's right and mine.
Take that, thou likeness of this railer here.
Stabs him
Sprawl'st thou? take that, to end thy agony.
Stabs him
And there's for twitting me with perjury.
Stabs him
O, kill me too!
Marry, and shall.
Offers to kill her
Hold, Richard, hold
Why should she live, to fill the world with words?
What, doth she swoon? use means for her recovery.
Clarence, excuse me to the king my brother
I'll hence to London on a serious matter:
Ere ye come there, be sure to hear some news.
What? what?
The Tower, the Tower.
Exit
O Ned, sweet Ned! speak to thy mother, boy!
Canst thou not speak? O traitors! murderers!
They that stabb'd Caesar shed no blood at all,
Did not offend, nor were not worthy blame,
If this foul deed were by to equal it:
He was a man
And men ne'er spend their fury on a child.
What's worse than murderer, that I may name it?
No, no, my heart will burst, and if I speak:
And I will speak, that so my heart may burst.
Butchers and villains! bloody cannibals!
How sweet a plant have you untimely cropp'd!
You have no children, butchers! if you had,
The thought of them would have stirr'd up remorse:
But if you ever chance to have a child,
Look in his youth to have him so cut off
As, deathmen, you have rid this sweet young prince!
Away with her
Nay, never bear me hence, dispatch me here,
Here sheathe thy sword, I'll pardon thee my death:
What, wilt thou not? then, Clarence, do it thou.
By heaven, I will not do thee so much ease.
Good Clarence, do
Didst thou not hear me swear I would not do it?
Ay, but thou usest to forswear thyself:
'Twas sin before, but now 'tis charity.
What, wilt thou not? Where is that devil's butcher,
Hard-favour'd Richard? Richard, where art thou?
Thou art not here: murder is thy alms-deed
Petitioners for blood thou ne'er put'st back.
Away, I say
So come to you and yours, as to this Prince!
Exit, led out forcibly
Where's Richard gone?
To London, all in post
To make a bloody supper in the Tower.
He's sudden, if a thing comes in his head.
Now march we hence: discharge the common sort
With pay and thanks, and let's away to London
And see our gentle queen how well she fares:
By this, I hope, she hath a son for me.
Exeunt
SCENE VI. London. The Tower.
Enter KING HENRY VI and GLOUCESTER, with the Lieutenant, on the walls
Good day, my lord. What, at your book so hard?
Ay, my good lord:--my lord, I should say rather
'Tis sin to flatter
'Good Gloucester' and 'good devil' were alike,
And both preposterous
Sirrah, leave us to ourselves: we must confer.
Exit Lieutenant
So flies the reckless shepherd from the wolf
So first the harmless sheep doth yield his fleece
And next his throat unto the butcher's knife.
What scene of death hath Roscius now to act?
Suspicion always haunts the guilty mind
The thief doth fear each bush an officer.
The bird that hath been limed in a bush,
With trembling wings misdoubteth every bush
And I, the hapless male to one sweet bird,
Have now the fatal object in my eye
Where my poor young was limed, was caught and kill'd.
Why, what a peevish fool was that of Crete,
That taught his son the office of a fowl!
An yet, for all his wings, the fool was drown'd.
I, Daedalus
Thy father, Minos, that denied our course
The sun that sear'd the wings of my sweet boy
Thy brother Edward, and thyself the sea
Whose envious gulf did swallow up his life.
Ah, kill me with thy weapon, not with words!
My breast can better brook thy dagger's point
Than can my ears that tragic history.
But wherefore dost thou come? is't for my life?
Think'st thou I am an executioner?
A persecutor, I am sure, thou art:
If murdering innocents be executing,
Why, then thou art an executioner.
Thy son I kill'd for his presumption.
Hadst thou been kill'd when first thou didst presume,
Thou hadst not lived to kill a son of mine.
And thus I prophesy, that many a thousand,
Which now mistrust no parcel of my fear,
And many an old man's sigh and many a widow's,
And many an orphan's water-standing eye--
Men for their sons, wives for their husbands,
And orphans for their parents timeless death--
Shall rue the hour that ever thou wast born.
The owl shriek'd at thy birth,--an evil sign
The night-crow cried, aboding luckless time
Dogs howl'd, and hideous tempest shook down trees
The raven rook'd her on the chimney's top,
And chattering pies in dismal discords sung.
Thy mother felt more than a mother's pain,
And, yet brought forth less than a mother's hope,
To wit, an indigested and deformed lump,
Not like the fruit of such a goodly tree.
Teeth hadst thou in thy head when thou wast born,
To signify thou camest to bite the world:
And, if the rest be true which I have heard,
Thou camest--
I'll hear no more: die, prophet in thy speech:
Stabs him
For this amongst the rest, was I ordain'd.
Ay, and for much more slaughter after this.
God forgive my sins, and pardon thee!
Dies
What, will the aspiring blood of Lancaster
Sink in the ground? I thought it would have mounted.
See how my sword weeps for the poor king's death!
O, may such purple tears be alway shed
From those that wish the downfall of our house!
If any spark of life be yet remaining,
Down, down to hell
Stabs him again
I, that have neither pity, love, nor fear.
Indeed, 'tis true that Henry told me of
For I have often heard my mother say
I came into the world with my legs forward:
Had I not reason, think ye, to make haste,
And seek their ruin that usurp'd our right?
The midwife wonder'd and the women cried
'O, Jesus bless us, he is born with teeth!'
And so I was
That I should snarl and bite and play the dog.
Then, since the heavens have shaped my body so,
Let hell make crook'd my mind to answer it.
I have no brother, I am like no brother
And this word 'love,' which graybeards call divine,
Be resident in men like one another
And not in me: I am myself alone.
Clarence, beware
But I will sort a pitchy day for thee
For I will buz abroad such prophecies
That Edward shall be fearful of his life,
And then, to purge his fear, I'll be thy death.
King Henry and the prince his son are gone:
Clarence, thy turn is next, and then the rest,
Counting myself but bad till I be best.
I'll throw thy body in another room
And triumph, Henry, in thy day of doom.
Exit, with the body
SCENE VII. London. The palace.
Flourish. Enter KING EDWARD IV, QUEEN ELIZABETH,  CLARENCE, GLOUCESTER, HASTINGS, a Nurse with the young Prince, and Attendants
Once more we sit in England's royal throne,
Re-purchased with the blood of enemies.
What valiant foemen, like to autumn's corn,
Have we mow'd down, in tops of all their pride!
Three Dukes of Somerset, threefold renown'd
For hardy and undoubted champions
Two Cliffords, as the father and the son,
And two Northumberlands
Ne'er spurr'd their coursers at the trumpet's sound
With them, the two brave bears, Warwick and Montague,
That in their chains fetter'd the kingly lion
And made the forest tremble when they roar'd.
Thus have we swept suspicion from our seat
And made our footstool of security.
Come hither, Bess, and let me kiss my boy.
Young Ned, for thee, thine uncles and myself
Have in our armours watch'd the winter's night,
Went all afoot in summer's scalding heat,
That thou mightst repossess the crown in peace
And of our labours thou shalt reap the gain.
[Aside]  I'll blast his harvest, if your head were laid
For yet I am not look'd on in the world.
This shoulder was ordain'd so thick to heave
And heave it shall some weight, or break my back:
Work thou the way,--and thou shalt execute.
Clarence and Gloucester, love my lovely queen
And kiss your princely nephew, brothers both.
The duty that I owe unto your majesty
I seal upon the lips of this sweet babe.
Thanks, noble Clarence
And, that I love the tree from whence thou sprang'st,
Witness the loving kiss I give the fruit.
Aside
And cried 'all hail!' when as he meant all harm.
Now am I seated as my soul delights,
Having my country's peace and brothers' loves.
What will your grace have done with Margaret?
Reignier, her father, to the king of France
Hath pawn'd the Sicils and Jerusalem,
And hither have they sent it for her ransom.
Away with her, and waft her hence to France.
And now what rests but that we spend the time
With stately triumphs, mirthful comic shows,
Such as befits the pleasure of the court?
Sound drums and trumpets! farewell sour annoy!
For here, I hope, begins our lasting joy.
Exeunt
ACT I
SCENE I. Rousillon. The COUNT's palace.
Enter BERTRAM, the COUNTESS of Rousillon, HELENA, and LAFEU, all in black
In delivering my son from me, I bury a second husband.
And I in going, madam, weep o'er my father's death
anew: but I must attend his majesty's command, to
whom I am now in ward, evermore in subjection.
You shall find of the king a husband, madam
sir, a father: he that so generally is at all times
good must of necessity hold his virtue to you
worthiness would stir it up where it wanted rather
than lack it where there is such abundance.
What hope is there of his majesty's amendment?
He hath abandoned his physicians, madam
practises he hath persecuted time with hope, and
finds no other advantage in the process but only the
losing of hope by time.
This young gentlewoman had a father,--O, that
'had'! how sad a passage 'tis!--whose skill was
almost as great as his honesty
far, would have made nature immortal, and death
should have play for lack of work. Would, for the
king's sake, he were living! I think it would be
the death of the king's disease.
How called you the man you speak of, madam?
He was famous, sir, in his profession, and it was
his great right to be so: Gerard de Narbon.
He was excellent indeed, madam: the king very
lately spoke of him admiringly and mourningly: he
was skilful enough to have lived still, if knowledge
could be set up against mortality.
What is it, my good lord, the king languishes of?
A fistula, my lord.
I heard not of it before.
I would it were not notorious. Was this gentlewoman
the daughter of Gerard de Narbon?
His sole child, my lord, and bequeathed to my
overlooking. I have those hopes of her good that
her education promises
inherits, which makes fair gifts fairer
an unclean mind carries virtuous qualities, there
commendations go with pity
traitors too
simpleness
Your commendations, madam, get from her tears.
'Tis the best brine a maiden can season her praise
in. The remembrance of her father never approaches
her heart but the tyranny of her sorrows takes all
livelihood from her cheek. No more of this, Helena
go to, no more
a sorrow than have it.
I do affect a sorrow indeed, but I have it too.
Moderate lamentation is the right of the dead,
excessive grief the enemy to the living.
If the living be enemy to the grief, the excess
makes it soon mortal.
Madam, I desire your holy wishes.
How understand we that?
Be thou blest, Bertram, and succeed thy father
In manners, as in shape! thy blood and virtue
Contend for empire in thee, and thy goodness
Share with thy birthright! Love all, trust a few,
Do wrong to none: be able for thine enemy
Rather in power than use, and keep thy friend
Under thy own life's key: be cheque'd for silence,
But never tax'd for speech. What heaven more will,
That thee may furnish and my prayers pluck down,
Fall on thy head! Farewell, my lord
'Tis an unseason'd courtier
Advise him.
He cannot want the best
That shall attend his love.
Heaven bless him! Farewell, Bertram.
Exit
[To HELENA]  The best wishes that can be forged in
your thoughts be servants to you! Be comfortable
to my mother, your mistress, and make much of her.
Farewell, pretty lady: you must hold the credit of
your father.
Exeunt BERTRAM and LAFEU
O, were that all! I think not on my father
And these great tears grace his remembrance more
Than those I shed for him. What was he like?
I have forgot him: my imagination
Carries no favour in't but Bertram's.
I am undone: there is no living, none,
If Bertram be away. 'Twere all one
That I should love a bright particular star
And think to wed it, he is so above me:
In his bright radiance and collateral light
Must I be comforted, not in his sphere.
The ambition in my love thus plagues itself:
The hind that would be mated by the lion
Must die for love. 'Twas pretty, though plague,
To see him every hour
His arched brows, his hawking eye, his curls,
In our heart's table
Of every line and trick of his sweet favour:
But now he's gone, and my idolatrous fancy
Must sanctify his reliques. Who comes here?
Enter PAROLLES
Aside
One that goes with him: I love him for his sake
And yet I know him a notorious liar,
Think him a great way fool, solely a coward
Yet these fixed evils sit so fit in him,
That they take place, when virtue's steely bones
Look bleak i' the cold wind: withal, full oft we see
Cold wisdom waiting on superfluous folly.
Save you, fair queen!
And you, monarch!
No.
And no.
Are you meditating on virginity?
Ay. You have some stain of soldier in you: let me
ask you a question. Man is enemy to virginity
may we barricado it against him?
Keep him out.
But he assails
in the defence yet is weak: unfold to us some
warlike resistance.
There is none: man, sitting down before you, will
undermine you and blow you up.
Bless our poor virginity from underminers and
blowers up! Is there no military policy, how
virgins might blow up men?
Virginity being blown down, man will quicklier be
blown up: marry, in blowing him down again, with
the breach yourselves made, you lose your city. It
is not politic in the commonwealth of nature to
preserve virginity. Loss of virginity is rational
increase and there was never virgin got till
virginity was first lost. That you were made of is
metal to make virgins. Virginity by being once lost
may be ten times found
ever lost: 'tis too cold a companion
I will stand for 't a little, though therefore I die a virgin.
There's little can be said in 't
rule of nature. To speak on the part of virginity,
is to accuse your mothers
disobedience. He that hangs himself is a virgin:
virginity murders itself and should be buried in
highways out of all sanctified limit, as a desperate
offendress against nature. Virginity breeds mites,
much like a cheese
paring, and so dies with feeding his own stomach.
Besides, virginity is peevish, proud, idle, made of
self-love, which is the most inhibited sin in the
canon. Keep it not
by't: out with 't! within ten year it will make
itself ten, which is a goodly increase
principal itself not much the worse: away with 't!
How might one do, sir, to lose it to her own liking?
Let me see: marry, ill, to like him that ne'er it
likes. 'Tis a commodity will lose the gloss with
lying
while 'tis vendible
Virginity, like an old courtier, wears her cap out
of fashion: richly suited, but unsuitable: just
like the brooch and the tooth-pick, which wear not
now. Your date is better in your pie and your
porridge than in your cheek
your old virginity, is like one of our French
withered pears, it looks ill, it eats drily
'tis a withered pear
marry, yet 'tis a withered pear: will you anything with it?
Not my virginity yet [         ]
There shall your master have a thousand loves,
A mother and a mistress and a friend,
A phoenix, captain and an enemy,
A guide, a goddess, and a sovereign,
A counsellor, a traitress, and a dear
His humble ambition, proud humility,
His jarring concord, and his discord dulcet,
His faith, his sweet disaster
Of pretty, fond, adoptious christendoms,
That blinking Cupid gossips. Now shall he--
I know not what he shall. God send him well!
The court's a learning place, and he is one--
What one, i' faith?
That I wish well. 'Tis pity--
What's pity?
That wishing well had not a body in't,
Which might be felt
Whose baser stars do shut us up in wishes,
Might with effects of them follow our friends,
And show what we alone must think, which never
Return us thanks.
Enter Page
Monsieur Parolles, my lord calls for you.
Exit
Little Helen, farewell
will think of thee at court.
Monsieur Parolles, you were born under a charitable star.
Under Mars, I.
I especially think, under Mars.
Why under Mars?
The wars have so kept you under that you must needs
be born under Mars.
When he was predominant.
When he was retrograde, I think, rather.
Why think you so?
You go so much backward when you fight.
That's for advantage.
So is running away, when fear proposes the safety
but the composition that your valour and fear makes
in you is a virtue of a good wing, and I like the wear well.
I am so full of businesses, I cannot answer thee
acutely. I will return perfect courtier
which, my instruction shall serve to naturalize
thee, so thou wilt be capable of a courtier's
counsel and understand what advice shall thrust upon
thee
thine ignorance makes thee away: farewell. When
thou hast leisure, say thy prayers
none, remember thy friends
and use him as he uses thee
Exit
Our remedies oft in ourselves do lie,
Which we ascribe to heaven: the fated sky
Gives us free scope, only doth backward pull
Our slow designs when we ourselves are dull.
What power is it which mounts my love so high,
That makes me see, and cannot feed mine eye?
The mightiest space in fortune nature brings
To join like likes and kiss like native things.
Impossible be strange attempts to those
That weigh their pains in sense and do suppose
What hath been cannot be: who ever strove
So show her merit, that did miss her love?
The king's disease--my project may deceive me,
But my intents are fix'd and will not leave me.
Exit
SCENE II. Paris. The KING's palace.
Flourish of cornets. Enter the KING of France, with letters, and divers Attendants
The Florentines and Senoys are by the ears
Have fought with equal fortune and continue
A braving war.
So 'tis reported, sir.
Nay, 'tis most credible
A certainty, vouch'd from our cousin Austria,
With caution that the Florentine will move us
For speedy aid
Prejudicates the business and would seem
To have us make denial.
His love and wisdom,
Approved so to your majesty, may plead
For amplest credence.
He hath arm'd our answer,
And Florence is denied before he comes:
Yet, for our gentlemen that mean to see
The Tuscan service, freely have they leave
To stand on either part.
It well may serve
A nursery to our gentry, who are sick
For breathing and exploit.
What's he comes here?
Enter BERTRAM, LAFEU, and PAROLLES
It is the Count Rousillon, my good lord,
Young Bertram.
Youth, thou bear'st thy father's face
Frank nature, rather curious than in haste,
Hath well composed thee. Thy father's moral parts
Mayst thou inherit too! Welcome to Paris.
My thanks and duty are your majesty's.
I would I had that corporal soundness now,
As when thy father and myself in friendship
First tried our soldiership! He did look far
Into the service of the time and was
Discipled of the bravest: he lasted long
But on us both did haggish age steal on
And wore us out of act. It much repairs me
To talk of your good father. In his youth
He had the wit which I can well observe
To-day in our young lords
Till their own scorn return to them unnoted
Ere they can hide their levity in honour
So like a courtier, contempt nor bitterness
Were in his pride or sharpness
His equal had awaked them, and his honour,
Clock to itself, knew the true minute when
Exception bid him speak, and at this time
His tongue obey'd his hand: who were below him
He used as creatures of another place
And bow'd his eminent top to their low ranks,
Making them proud of his humility,
In their poor praise he humbled. Such a man
Might be a copy to these younger times
Which, follow'd well, would demonstrate them now
But goers backward.
His good remembrance, sir,
Lies richer in your thoughts than on his tomb
So in approof lives not his epitaph
As in your royal speech.
Would I were with him! He would always say--
Methinks I hear him now
He scatter'd not in ears, but grafted them,
To grow there and to bear,--'Let me not live,'--
This his good melancholy oft began,
On the catastrophe and heel of pastime,
When it was out,--'Let me not live,' quoth he,
'After my flame lacks oil, to be the snuff
Of younger spirits, whose apprehensive senses
All but new things disdain
Mere fathers of their garments
Expire before their fashions.' This he wish'd
I after him do after him wish too,
Since I nor wax nor honey can bring home,
I quickly were dissolved from my hive,
To give some labourers room.
You are loved, sir:
They that least lend it you shall lack you first.
I fill a place, I know't. How long is't, count,
Since the physician at your father's died?
He was much famed.
Some six months since, my lord.
If he were living, I would try him yet.
Lend me an arm
With several applications
Debate it at their leisure. Welcome, count
My son's no dearer.
Thank your majesty.
Exeunt. Flourish
SCENE III. Rousillon. The COUNT's palace.
Enter COUNTESS, Steward, and Clown
I will now hear
Madam, the care I have had to even your content, I
wish might be found in the calendar of my past
endeavours
foul the clearness of our deservings, when of
ourselves we publish them.
What does this knave here? Get you gone, sirrah:
the complaints I have heard of you I do not all
believe: 'tis my slowness that I do not
you lack not folly to commit them, and have ability
enough to make such knaveries yours.
'Tis not unknown to you, madam, I am a poor fellow.
Well, sir.
No, madam, 'tis not so well that I am poor, though
many of the rich are damned: but, if I may have
your ladyship's good will to go to the world, Isbel
the woman and I will do as we may.
Wilt thou needs be a beggar?
I do beg your good will in this case.
In what case?
In Isbel's case and mine own. Service is no
heritage: and I think I shall never have the
blessing of God till I have issue o' my body
they say barnes are blessings.
Tell me thy reason why thou wilt marry.
My poor body, madam, requires it: I am driven on
by the flesh
Is this all your worship's reason?
Faith, madam, I have other holy reasons such as they
are.
May the world know them?
I have been, madam, a wicked creature, as you and
all flesh and blood are
that I may repent.
Thy marriage, sooner than thy wickedness.
I am out o' friends, madam
friends for my wife's sake.
Such friends are thine enemies, knave.
You're shallow, madam, in great friends
knaves come to do that for me which I am aweary of.
He that ears my land spares my team and gives me
leave to in the crop
drudge: he that comforts my wife is the cherisher
of my flesh and blood
and blood loves my flesh and blood
flesh and blood is my friend: ergo, he that kisses
my wife is my friend. If men could be contented to
be what they are, there were no fear in marriage
for young Charbon the Puritan and old Poysam the
Papist, howsome'er their hearts are severed in
religion, their heads are both one
horns together, like any deer i' the herd.
Wilt thou ever be a foul-mouthed and calumnious knave?
A prophet I, madam
way:
For I the ballad will repeat,
Which men full true shall find
Your marriage comes by destiny,
Your cuckoo sings by kind.
Get you gone, sir
May it please you, madam, that he bid Helen come to
you: of her I am to speak.
Sirrah, tell my gentlewoman I would speak with her
Helen, I mean.
Was this fair face the cause, quoth she,
Why the Grecians sacked Troy?
Fond done, done fond,
Was this King Priam's joy?
With that she sighed as she stood,
With that she sighed as she stood,
And gave this sentence then
Among nine bad if one be good,
Among nine bad if one be good,
There's yet one good in ten.
What, one good in ten? you corrupt the song, sirrah.
One good woman in ten, madam
o' the song: would God would serve the world so all
the year! we'ld find no fault with the tithe-woman,
if I were the parson. One in ten, quoth a'! An we
might have a good woman born but one every blazing
star, or at an earthquake, 'twould mend the lottery
well: a man may draw his heart out, ere a' pluck
one.
You'll be gone, sir knave, and do as I command you.
That man should be at woman's command, and yet no
hurt done! Though honesty be no puritan, yet it
will do no hurt
humility over the black gown of a big heart. I am
going, forsooth: the business is for Helen to come hither.
Exit
Well, now.
I know, madam, you love your gentlewoman entirely.
Faith, I do: her father bequeathed her to me
she herself, without other advantage, may lawfully
make title to as much love as she finds: there is
more owing her than is paid
her than she'll demand.
Madam, I was very late more near her than I think
she wished me: alone she was, and did communicate
to herself her own words to her own ears
thought, I dare vow for her, they touched not any
stranger sense. Her matter was, she loved your son:
Fortune, she said, was no goddess, that had put
such difference betwixt their two estates
god, that would not extend his might, only where
qualities were level
would suffer her poor knight surprised, without
rescue in the first assault or ransom afterward.
This she delivered in the most bitter touch of
sorrow that e'er I heard virgin exclaim in: which I
held my duty speedily to acquaint you withal
sithence, in the loss that may happen, it concerns
you something to know it.
You have discharged this honestly
yourself: many likelihoods informed me of this
before, which hung so tottering in the balance that
I could neither believe nor misdoubt. Pray you,
leave me: stall this in your bosom
for your honest care: I will speak with you further anon.
Exit Steward
Enter HELENA
Even so it was with me when I was young:
If ever we are nature's, these are ours
Doth to our rose of youth rightly belong
Our blood to us, this to our blood is born
It is the show and seal of nature's truth,
Where love's strong passion is impress'd in youth:
By our remembrances of days foregone,
Such were our faults, or then we thought them none.
Her eye is sick on't: I observe her now.
What is your pleasure, madam?
You know, Helen,
I am a mother to you.
Mine honourable mistress.
Nay, a mother:
Why not a mother? When I said 'a mother,'
Methought you saw a serpent: what's in 'mother,'
That you start at it? I say, I am your mother
And put you in the catalogue of those
That were enwombed mine: 'tis often seen
Adoption strives with nature and choice breeds
A native slip to us from foreign seeds:
You ne'er oppress'd me with a mother's groan,
Yet I express to you a mother's care:
God's mercy, maiden! does it curd thy blood
To say I am thy mother? What's the matter,
That this distemper'd messenger of wet,
The many-colour'd Iris, rounds thine eye?
Why? that you are my daughter?
That I am not.
I say, I am your mother.
Pardon, madam
The Count Rousillon cannot be my brother:
I am from humble, he from honour'd name
No note upon my parents, his all noble:
My master, my dear lord he is
His servant live, and will his vassal die:
He must not be my brother.
Nor I your mother?
You are my mother, madam
So that my lord your son were not my brother,--
Indeed my mother! or were you both our mothers,
I care no more for than I do for heaven,
So I were not his sister. Can't no other,
But, I your daughter, he must be my brother?
Yes, Helen, you might be my daughter-in-law:
God shield you mean it not! daughter and mother
So strive upon your pulse. What, pale again?
My fear hath catch'd your fondness: now I see
The mystery of your loneliness, and find
Your salt tears' head: now to all sense 'tis gross
You love my son
Against the proclamation of thy passion,
To say thou dost not: therefore tell me true
But tell me then, 'tis so
Confess it, th' one to th' other
See it so grossly shown in thy behaviors
That in their kind they speak it: only sin
And hellish obstinacy tie thy tongue,
That truth should be suspected. Speak, is't so?
If it be so, you have wound a goodly clew
If it be not, forswear't: howe'er, I charge thee,
As heaven shall work in me for thine avail,
Tell me truly.
Good madam, pardon me!
Do you love my son?
Your pardon, noble mistress!
Love you my son?
Do not you love him, madam?
Go not about
Whereof the world takes note: come, come, disclose
The state of your affection
Have to the full appeach'd.
Then, I confess,
Here on my knee, before high heaven and you,
That before you, and next unto high heaven,
I love your son.
My friends were poor, but honest
Be not offended
That he is loved of me: I follow him not
By any token of presumptuous suit
Nor would I have him till I do deserve him
Yet never know how that desert should be.
I know I love in vain, strive against hope
Yet in this captious and intenible sieve
I still pour in the waters of my love
And lack not to lose still: thus, Indian-like,
Religious in mine error, I adore
The sun, that looks upon his worshipper,
But knows of him no more. My dearest madam,
Let not your hate encounter with my love
For loving where you do: but if yourself,
Whose aged honour cites a virtuous youth,
Did ever in so true a flame of liking
Wish chastely and love dearly, that your Dian
Was both herself and love: O, then, give pity
To her, whose state is such that cannot choose
But lend and give where she is sure to lose
That seeks not to find that her search implies,
But riddle-like lives sweetly where she dies!
Had you not lately an intent,--speak truly,--
To go to Paris?
Madam, I had.
Wherefore? tell true.
I will tell truth
You know my father left me some prescriptions
Of rare and proved effects, such as his reading
And manifest experience had collected
For general sovereignty
In heedfull'st reservation to bestow them,
As notes whose faculties inclusive were
More than they were in note: amongst the rest,
There is a remedy, approved, set down,
To cure the desperate languishings whereof
The king is render'd lost.
This was your motive
For Paris, was it? speak.
My lord your son made me to think of this
Else Paris and the medicine and the king
Had from the conversation of my thoughts
Haply been absent then.
But think you, Helen,
If you should tender your supposed aid,
He would receive it? he and his physicians
Are of a mind
They, that they cannot help: how shall they credit
A poor unlearned virgin, when the schools,
Embowell'd of their doctrine, have left off
The danger to itself?
There's something in't,
More than my father's skill, which was the greatest
Of his profession, that his good receipt
Shall for my legacy be sanctified
By the luckiest stars in heaven: and, would your honour
But give me leave to try success, I'ld venture
The well-lost life of mine on his grace's cure
By such a day and hour.
Dost thou believe't?
Ay, madam, knowingly.
Why, Helen, thou shalt have my leave and love,
Means and attendants and my loving greetings
To those of mine in court: I'll stay at home
And pray God's blessing into thy attempt:
Be gone to-morrow
What I can help thee to thou shalt not miss.
Exeunt
ACT II
SCENE I. Paris. The KING's palace.
Flourish of cornets. Enter the KING, attended  with divers young Lords taking leave for the Florentine war
Farewell, young lords
Do not throw from you: and you, my lords, farewell:
Share the advice betwixt you
The gift doth stretch itself as 'tis received,
And is enough for both.
'Tis our hope, sir,
After well enter'd soldiers, to return
And find your grace in health.
No, no, it cannot be
Will not confess he owes the malady
That doth my life besiege. Farewell, young lords
Whether I live or die, be you the sons
Of worthy Frenchmen: let higher Italy,--
Those bated that inherit but the fall
Of the last monarchy,--see that you come
Not to woo honour, but to wed it
The bravest questant shrinks, find what you seek,
That fame may cry you loud: I say, farewell.
Health, at your bidding, serve your majesty!
Those girls of Italy, take heed of them:
They say, our French lack language to deny,
If they demand: beware of being captives,
Before you serve.
Our hearts receive your warnings.
Farewell. Come hither to me.
Exit, attended
O, my sweet lord, that you will stay behind us!
'Tis not his fault, the spark.
O, 'tis brave wars!
Most admirable: I have seen those wars.
I am commanded here, and kept a coil with
'Too young' and 'the next year' and ''tis too early.'
An thy mind stand to't, boy, steal away bravely.
I shall stay here the forehorse to a smock,
Creaking my shoes on the plain masonry,
Till honour be bought up and no sword worn
But one to dance with! By heaven, I'll steal away.
There's honour in the theft.
Commit it, count.
I am your accessary
I grow to you, and our parting is a tortured body.
Farewell, captain.
Sweet Monsieur Parolles!
Noble heroes, my sword and yours are kin. Good
sparks and lustrous, a word, good metals: you shall
find in the regiment of the Spinii one Captain
Spurio, with his cicatrice, an emblem of war, here
on his sinister cheek
entrenched it: say to him, I live
reports for me.
We shall, noble captain.
Exeunt Lords
Mars dote on you for his novices! what will ye do?
Stay: the king.
Re-enter KING. BERTRAM and PAROLLES retire
[To BERTRAM]  Use a more spacious ceremony to the
noble lords
list of too cold an adieu: be more expressive to
them: for they wear themselves in the cap of the
time, there do muster true gait, eat, speak, and
move under the influence of the most received star
and though the devil lead the measure, such are to
be followed: after them, and take a more dilated farewell.
And I will do so.
Worthy fellows
Exeunt BERTRAM and PAROLLES
Enter LAFEU
[Kneeling]  Pardon, my lord, for me and for my tidings.
I'll fee thee to stand up.
Then here's a man stands, that has brought his pardon.
I would you had kneel'd, my lord, to ask me mercy,
And that at my bidding you could so stand up.
I would I had
And ask'd thee mercy for't.
Good faith, across: but, my good lord 'tis thus
Will you be cured of your infirmity?
No.
O, will you eat no grapes, my royal fox?
Yes, but you will my noble grapes, an if
My royal fox could reach them: I have seen a medicine
That's able to breathe life into a stone,
Quicken a rock, and make you dance canary
With spritely fire and motion
Is powerful to araise King Pepin, nay,
To give great Charlemain a pen in's hand,
And write to her a love-line.
What 'her' is this?
Why, Doctor She: my lord, there's one arrived,
If you will see her: now, by my faith and honour,
If seriously I may convey my thoughts
In this my light deliverance, I have spoke
With one that, in her sex, her years, profession,
Wisdom and constancy, hath amazed me more
Than I dare blame my weakness: will you see her
For that is her demand, and know her business?
That done, laugh well at me.
Now, good Lafeu,
Bring in the admiration
May spend our wonder too, or take off thine
By wondering how thou took'st it.
Nay, I'll fit you,
And not be all day neither.
Exit
Thus he his special nothing ever prologues.
Re-enter LAFEU, with HELENA
Nay, come your ways.
This haste hath wings indeed.
Nay, come your ways:
This is his majesty
A traitor you do look like
His majesty seldom fears: I am Cressid's uncle,
That dare leave two together
Exit
Now, fair one, does your business follow us?
Ay, my good lord.
Gerard de Narbon was my father
In what he did profess, well found.
I knew him.
The rather will I spare my praises towards him:
Knowing him is enough. On's bed of death
Many receipts he gave me: chiefly one.
Which, as the dearest issue of his practise,
And of his old experience the oily darling,
He bade me store up, as a triple eye,
Safer than mine own two, more dear
And hearing your high majesty is touch'd
With that malignant cause wherein the honour
Of my dear father's gift stands chief in power,
I come to tender it and my appliance
With all bound humbleness.
We thank you, maiden
But may not be so credulous of cure,
When our most learned doctors leave us and
The congregated college have concluded
That labouring art can never ransom nature
From her inaidible estate
So stain our judgment, or corrupt our hope,
To prostitute our past-cure malady
To empirics, or to dissever so
Our great self and our credit, to esteem
A senseless help when help past sense we deem.
My duty then shall pay me for my pains:
I will no more enforce mine office on you.
Humbly entreating from your royal thoughts
A modest one, to bear me back again.
I cannot give thee less, to be call'd grateful:
Thou thought'st to help me
As one near death to those that wish him live:
But what at full I know, thou know'st no part,
I knowing all my peril, thou no art.
What I can do can do no hurt to try,
Since you set up your rest 'gainst remedy.
He that of greatest works is finisher
Oft does them by the weakest minister:
So holy writ in babes hath judgment shown,
When judges have been babes
From simple sources, and great seas have dried
When miracles have by the greatest been denied.
Oft expectation fails and most oft there
Where most it promises, and oft it hits
Where hope is coldest and despair most fits.
I must not hear thee
Thy pains not used must by thyself be paid:
Proffers not took reap thanks for their reward.
Inspired merit so by breath is barr'd:
It is not so with Him that all things knows
As 'tis with us that square our guess by shows
But most it is presumption in us when
The help of heaven we count the act of men.
Dear sir, to my endeavours give consent
Of heaven, not me, make an experiment.
I am not an impostor that proclaim
Myself against the level of mine aim
But know I think and think I know most sure
My art is not past power nor you past cure.
Are thou so confident? within what space
Hopest thou my cure?
The great'st grace lending grace
Ere twice the horses of the sun shall bring
Their fiery torcher his diurnal ring,
Ere twice in murk and occidental damp
Moist Hesperus hath quench'd his sleepy lamp,
Or four and twenty times the pilot's glass
Hath told the thievish minutes how they pass,
What is infirm from your sound parts shall fly,
Health shall live free and sickness freely die.
Upon thy certainty and confidence
What darest thou venture?
Tax of impudence,
A strumpet's boldness, a divulged shame
Traduced by odious ballads: my maiden's name
Sear'd otherwise
With vilest torture let my life be ended.
Methinks in thee some blessed spirit doth speak
His powerful sound within an organ weak:
And what impossibility would slay
In common sense, sense saves another way.
Thy life is dear
Worth name of life in thee hath estimate,
Youth, beauty, wisdom, courage, all
That happiness and prime can happy call:
Thou this to hazard needs must intimate
Skill infinite or monstrous desperate.
Sweet practiser, thy physic I will try,
That ministers thine own death if I die.
If I break time, or flinch in property
Of what I spoke, unpitied let me die,
And well deserved: not helping, death's my fee
But, if I help, what do you promise me?
Make thy demand.
But will you make it even?
Ay, by my sceptre and my hopes of heaven.
Then shalt thou give me with thy kingly hand
What husband in thy power I will command:
Exempted be from me the arrogance
To choose from forth the royal blood of France,
My low and humble name to propagate
With any branch or image of thy state
But such a one, thy vassal, whom I know
Is free for me to ask, thee to bestow.
Here is my hand
Thy will by my performance shall be served:
So make the choice of thy own time, for I,
Thy resolved patient, on thee still rely.
More should I question thee, and more I must,
Though more to know could not be more to trust,
From whence thou camest, how tended on: but rest
Unquestion'd welcome and undoubted blest.
Give me some help here, ho! If thou proceed
As high as word, my deed shall match thy meed.
Flourish. Exeunt
SCENE II. Rousillon. The COUNT's palace.
Enter COUNTESS and Clown
Come on, sir
your breeding.
I will show myself highly fed and lowly taught: I
know my business is but to the court.
To the court! why, what place make you special,
when you put off that with such contempt? But to the court!
Truly, madam, if God have lent a man any manners, he
may easily put it off at court: he that cannot make
a leg, put off's cap, kiss his hand and say nothing,
has neither leg, hands, lip, nor cap
such a fellow, to say precisely, were not for the
court
men.
Marry, that's a bountiful answer that fits all
questions.
It is like a barber's chair that fits all buttocks,
the pin-buttock, the quatch-buttock, the brawn
buttock, or any buttock.
Will your answer serve fit to all questions?
As fit as ten groats is for the hand of an attorney,
as your French crown for your taffeta punk, as Tib's
rush for Tom's forefinger, as a pancake for Shrove
Tuesday, a morris for May-day, as the nail to his
hole, the cuckold to his horn, as a scolding queen
to a wrangling knave, as the nun's lip to the
friar's mouth, nay, as the pudding to his skin.
Have you, I say, an answer of such fitness for all
questions?
From below your duke to beneath your constable, it
will fit any question.
It must be an answer of most monstrous size that
must fit all demands.
But a trifle neither, in good faith, if the learned
should speak truth of it: here it is, and all that
belongs to't. Ask me if I am a courtier: it shall
do you no harm to learn.
To be young again, if we could: I will be a fool in
question, hoping to be the wiser by your answer. I
pray you, sir, are you a courtier?
O Lord, sir! There's a simple putting off. More,
more, a hundred of them.
Sir, I am a poor friend of yours, that loves you.
O Lord, sir! Thick, thick, spare not me.
I think, sir, you can eat none of this homely meat.
O Lord, sir! Nay, put me to't, I warrant you.
You were lately whipped, sir, as I think.
O Lord, sir! spare not me.
Do you cry, 'O Lord, sir!' at your whipping, and
'spare not me?' Indeed your 'O Lord, sir!' is very
sequent to your whipping: you would answer very well
to a whipping, if you were but bound to't.
I ne'er had worse luck in my life in my 'O Lord,
sir!' I see things may serve long, but not serve ever.
I play the noble housewife with the time
To entertain't so merrily with a fool.
O Lord, sir! why, there't serves well again.
An end, sir
And urge her to a present answer back:
Commend me to my kinsmen and my son:
This is not much.
Not much commendation to them.
Not much employment for you: you understand me?
Most fruitfully: I am there before my legs.
Haste you again.
Exeunt severally
SCENE III. Paris. The KING's palace.
Enter BERTRAM, LAFEU, and PAROLLES
They say miracles are past
philosophical persons, to make modern and familiar,
things supernatural and causeless. Hence is it that
we make trifles of terrors, ensconcing ourselves
into seeming knowledge, when we should submit
ourselves to an unknown fear.
Why, 'tis the rarest argument of wonder that hath
shot out in our latter times.
And so 'tis.
To be relinquish'd of the artists,--
So I say.
Both of Galen and Paracelsus.
So I say.
Of all the learned and authentic fellows,--
Right
That gave him out incurable,--
Why, there 'tis
Not to be helped,--
Right
Uncertain life, and sure death.
Just, you say well
I may truly say, it is a novelty to the world.
It is, indeed: if you will have it in showing, you
shall read it in--what do you call there?
A showing of a heavenly effect in an earthly actor.
That's it
Why, your dolphin is not lustier: 'fore me,
I speak in respect--
Nay, 'tis strange, 'tis very strange, that is the
brief and the tedious of it
facinerious spirit that will not acknowledge it to be the--
Very hand of heaven.
Ay, so I say.
In a most weak--
pausing
and debile minister, great power, great
transcendence: which should, indeed, give us a
further use to be made than alone the recovery of
the king, as to be--
pausing
generally thankful.
I would have said it
Enter KING, HELENA, and Attendants. LAFEU and PAROLLES retire
Lustig, as the Dutchman says: I'll like a maid the
better, whilst I have a tooth in my head: why, he's
able to lead her a coranto.
Mort du vinaigre! is not this Helen?
'Fore God, I think so.
Go, call before me all the lords in court.
Sit, my preserver, by thy patient's side
And with this healthful hand, whose banish'd sense
Thou hast repeal'd, a second time receive
The confirmation of my promised gift,
Which but attends thy naming.
Enter three or four Lords
Fair maid, send forth thine eye: this youthful parcel
Of noble bachelors stand at my bestowing,
O'er whom both sovereign power and father's voice
I have to use: thy frank election make
Thou hast power to choose, and they none to forsake.
To each of you one fair and virtuous mistress
Fall, when Love please! marry, to each, but one!
I'ld give bay Curtal and his furniture,
My mouth no more were broken than these boys',
And writ as little beard.
Peruse them well:
Not one of those but had a noble father.
Gentlemen,
Heaven hath through me restored the king to health.
We understand it, and thank heaven for you.
I am a simple maid, and therein wealthiest,
That I protest I simply am a maid.
Please it your majesty, I have done already:
The blushes in my cheeks thus whisper me,
'We blush that thou shouldst choose
Let the white death sit on thy cheek for ever
We'll ne'er come there again.'
Make choice
Who shuns thy love shuns all his love in me.
Now, Dian, from thy altar do I fly,
And to imperial Love, that god most high,
Do my sighs stream. Sir, will you hear my suit?
And grant it.
Thanks, sir
I had rather be in this choice than throw ames-ace
for my life.
The honour, sir, that flames in your fair eyes,
Before I speak, too threateningly replies:
Love make your fortunes twenty times above
Her that so wishes and her humble love!
No better, if you please.
My wish receive,
Which great Love grant! and so, I take my leave.
Do all they deny her? An they were sons of mine,
I'd have them whipped
Turk, to make eunuchs of.
Be not afraid that I your hand should take
I'll never do you wrong for your own sake:
Blessing upon your vows! and in your bed
Find fairer fortune, if you ever wed!
These boys are boys of ice, they'll none have her:
sure, they are bastards to the English
ne'er got 'em.
You are too young, too happy, and too good,
To make yourself a son out of my blood.
Fair one, I think not so.
There's one grape yet
wine: but if thou be'st not an ass, I am a youth
of fourteen
[To BERTRAM]  I dare not say I take you
Me and my service, ever whilst I live,
Into your guiding power. This is the man.
Why, then, young Bertram, take her
My wife, my liege! I shall beseech your highness,
In such a business give me leave to use
The help of mine own eyes.
Know'st thou not, Bertram,
What she has done for me?
Yes, my good lord
But never hope to know why I should marry her.
Thou know'st she has raised me from my sickly bed.
But follows it, my lord, to bring me down
Must answer for your raising? I know her well:
She had her breeding at my father's charge.
A poor physician's daughter my wife! Disdain
Rather corrupt me ever!
'Tis only title thou disdain'st in her, the which
I can build up. Strange is it that our bloods,
Of colour, weight, and heat, pour'd all together,
Would quite confound distinction, yet stand off
In differences so mighty. If she be
All that is virtuous, save what thou dislikest,
A poor physician's daughter, thou dislikest
Of virtue for the name: but do not so:
From lowest place when virtuous things proceed,
The place is dignified by the doer's deed:
Where great additions swell's, and virtue none,
It is a dropsied honour. Good alone
Is good without a name. Vileness is so:
The property by what it is should go,
Not by the title. She is young, wise, fair
In these to nature she's immediate heir,
And these breed honour: that is honour's scorn,
Which challenges itself as honour's born
And is not like the sire: honours thrive,
When rather from our acts we them derive
Than our foregoers: the mere word's a slave
Debosh'd on every tomb, on every grave
A lying trophy, and as oft is dumb
Where dust and damn'd oblivion is the tomb
Of honour'd bones indeed. What should be said?
If thou canst like this creature as a maid,
I can create the rest: virtue and she
Is her own dower
I cannot love her, nor will strive to do't.
Thou wrong'st thyself, if thou shouldst strive to choose.
That you are well restored, my lord, I'm glad:
Let the rest go.
My honour's at the stake
I must produce my power. Here, take her hand,
Proud scornful boy, unworthy this good gift
That dost in vile misprision shackle up
My love and her desert
We, poising us in her defective scale,
Shall weigh thee to the beam
It is in us to plant thine honour where
We please to have it grow. Cheque thy contempt:
Obey our will, which travails in thy good:
Believe not thy disdain, but presently
Do thine own fortunes that obedient right
Which both thy duty owes and our power claims
Or I will throw thee from my care for ever
Into the staggers and the careless lapse
Of youth and ignorance
Loosing upon thee, in the name of justice,
Without all terms of pity. Speak
Pardon, my gracious lord
My fancy to your eyes: when I consider
What great creation and what dole of honour
Flies where you bid it, I find that she, which late
Was in my nobler thoughts most base, is now
The praised of the king
Is as 'twere born so.
Take her by the hand,
And tell her she is thine: to whom I promise
A counterpoise, if not to thy estate
A balance more replete.
I take her hand.
Good fortune and the favour of the king
Smile upon this contract
Shall seem expedient on the now-born brief,
And be perform'd to-night: the solemn feast
Shall more attend upon the coming space,
Expecting absent friends. As thou lovest her,
Thy love's to me religious
Exeunt all but LAFEU and PAROLLES
[Advancing]  Do you hear, monsieur? a word with you.
Your pleasure, sir?
Your lord and master did well to make his
recantation.
Recantation! My lord! my master!
Ay
A most harsh one, and not to be understood without
bloody succeeding. My master!
Are you companion to the Count Rousillon?
To any count, to all counts, to what is man.
To what is count's man: count's master is of
another style.
You are too old, sir
I must tell thee, sirrah, I write man
title age cannot bring thee.
What I dare too well do, I dare not do.
I did think thee, for two ordinaries, to be a pretty
wise fellow
travel
bannerets about thee did manifoldly dissuade me from
believing thee a vessel of too great a burthen. I
have now found thee
not: yet art thou good for nothing but taking up
that thou't scarce worth.
Hadst thou not the privilege of antiquity upon thee,--
Do not plunge thyself too far in anger, lest thou
hasten thy trial
for a hen! So, my good window of lattice, fare thee
well: thy casement I need not open, for I look
through thee. Give me thy hand.
My lord, you give me most egregious indignity.
Ay, with all my heart
I have not, my lord, deserved it.
Yes, good faith, every dram of it
bate thee a scruple.
Well, I shall be wiser.
Even as soon as thou canst, for thou hast to pull at
a smack o' the contrary. If ever thou be'st bound
in thy scarf and beaten, thou shalt find what it is
to be proud of thy bondage. I have a desire to hold
my acquaintance with thee, or rather my knowledge,
that I may say in the default, he is a man I know.
My lord, you do me most insupportable vexation.
I would it were hell-pains for thy sake, and my poor
doing eternal: for doing I am past: as I will by
thee, in what motion age will give me leave.
Exit
Well, thou hast a son shall take this disgrace off
me
be patient
I'll beat him, by my life, if I can meet him with
any convenience, an he were double and double a
lord. I'll have no more pity of his age than I
would of--I'll beat him, an if I could but meet him again.
Re-enter LAFEU
Sirrah, your lord and master's married
for you: you have a new mistress.
I most unfeignedly beseech your lordship to make
some reservation of your wrongs: he is my good
lord: whom I serve above is my master.
Who? God?
Ay, sir.
The devil it is that's thy master. Why dost thou
garter up thy arms o' this fashion? dost make hose of
sleeves? do other servants so? Thou wert best set
thy lower part where thy nose stands. By mine
honour, if I were but two hours younger, I'ld beat
thee: methinks, thou art a general offence, and
every man should beat thee: I think thou wast
created for men to breathe themselves upon thee.
This is hard and undeserved measure, my lord.
Go to, sir
kernel out of a pomegranate
no true traveller: you are more saucy with lords
and honourable personages than the commission of your
birth and virtue gives you heraldry. You are not
worth another word, else I'ld call you knave. I leave you.
Exit
Good, very good
let it be concealed awhile.
Re-enter BERTRAM
Undone, and forfeited to cares for ever!
What's the matter, sweet-heart?
Although before the solemn priest I have sworn,
I will not bed her.
What, what, sweet-heart?
O my Parolles, they have married me!
I'll to the Tuscan wars, and never bed her.
France is a dog-hole, and it no more merits
The tread of a man's foot: to the wars!
There's letters from my mother: what the import is,
I know not yet.
Ay, that would be known. To the wars, my boy, to the wars!
He wears his honour in a box unseen,
That hugs his kicky-wicky here at home,
Spending his manly marrow in her arms,
Which should sustain the bound and high curvet
Of Mars's fiery steed. To other regions
France is a stable
Therefore, to the war!
It shall be so: I'll send her to my house,
Acquaint my mother with my hate to her,
And wherefore I am fled
That which I durst not speak
Shall furnish me to those Italian fields,
Where noble fellows strike: war is no strife
To the dark house and the detested wife.
Will this capriccio hold in thee? art sure?
Go with me to my chamber, and advise me.
I'll send her straight away: to-morrow
I'll to the wars, she to her single sorrow.
Why, these balls bound
A young man married is a man that's marr'd:
Therefore away, and leave her bravely
The king has done you wrong: but, hush, 'tis so.
Exeunt
SCENE IV. Paris. The KING's palace.
Enter HELENA and Clown
My mother greets me kindly
She is not well
very merry
given, she's very well and wants nothing i', the
world
If she be very well, what does she ail, that she's
not very well?
Truly, she's very well indeed, but for two things.
What two things?
One, that she's not in heaven, whither God send her
quickly! the other that she's in earth, from whence
God send her quickly!
Enter PAROLLES
Bless you, my fortunate lady!
I hope, sir, I have your good will to have mine own
good fortunes.
You had my prayers to lead them on
on, have them still. O, my knave, how does my old lady?
So that you had her wrinkles and I her money,
I would she did as you say.
Why, I say nothing.
Marry, you are the wiser man
tongue shakes out his master's undoing: to say
nothing, to do nothing, to know nothing, and to have
nothing, is to be a great part of your title
is within a very little of nothing.
Away! thou'rt a knave.
You should have said, sir, before a knave thou'rt a
knave
been truth, sir.
Go to, thou art a witty fool
Did you find me in yourself, sir? or were you
taught to find me? The search, sir, was profitable
and much fool may you find in you, even to the
world's pleasure and the increase of laughter.
A good knave, i' faith, and well fed.
Madam, my lord will go away to-night
A very serious business calls on him.
The great prerogative and rite of love,
Which, as your due, time claims, he does acknowledge
But puts it off to a compell'd restraint
Whose want, and whose delay, is strew'd with sweets,
Which they distil now in the curbed time,
To make the coming hour o'erflow with joy
And pleasure drown the brim.
What's his will else?
That you will take your instant leave o' the king
And make this haste as your own good proceeding,
Strengthen'd with what apology you think
May make it probable need.
What more commands he?
That, having this obtain'd, you presently
Attend his further pleasure.
In every thing I wait upon his will.
I shall report it so.
I pray you.
Exit PAROLLES
Come, sirrah.
Exeunt
SCENE V. Paris. The KING's palace.
Enter LAFEU and BERTRAM
But I hope your lordship thinks not him a soldier.
Yes, my lord, and of very valiant approof.
You have it from his own deliverance.
And by other warranted testimony.
Then my dial goes not true: I took this lark for a bunting.
I do assure you, my lord, he is very great in
knowledge and accordingly valiant.
I have then sinned against his experience and
transgressed against his valour
way is dangerous, since I cannot yet find in my
heart to repent. Here he comes: I pray you, make
us friends
Enter PAROLLES
[To BERTRAM]  These things shall be done, sir.
Pray you, sir, who's his tailor?
Sir?
O, I know him well, I, sir
workman, a very good tailor.
[Aside to PAROLLES]  Is she gone to the king?
She is.
Will she away to-night?
As you'll have her.
I have writ my letters, casketed my treasure,
Given order for our horses
When I should take possession of the bride,
End ere I do begin.
A good traveller is something at the latter end of a
dinner
known truth to pass a thousand nothings with, should
be once heard and thrice beaten. God save you, captain.
Is there any unkindness between my lord and you, monsieur?
I know not how I have deserved to run into my lord's
displeasure.
You have made shift to run into 't, boots and spurs
and all, like him that leaped into the custard
out of it you'll run again, rather than suffer
question for your residence.
It may be you have mistaken him, my lord.
And shall do so ever, though I took him at 's
prayers. Fare you well, my lord
of me, there can be no kernel in this light nut
soul of this man is his clothes. Trust him not in
matter of heavy consequence
tame, and know their natures. Farewell, monsieur:
I have spoken better of you than you have or will to
deserve at my hand
Exit
An idle lord. I swear.
I think so.
Why, do you not know him?
Yes, I do know him well, and common speech
Gives him a worthy pass. Here comes my clog.
Enter HELENA
I have, sir, as I was commanded from you,
Spoke with the king and have procured his leave
For present parting
Some private speech with you.
I shall obey his will.
You must not marvel, Helen, at my course,
Which holds not colour with the time, nor does
The ministration and required office
On my particular. Prepared I was not
For such a business
So much unsettled: this drives me to entreat you
That presently you take our way for home
And rather muse than ask why I entreat you,
For my respects are better than they seem
And my appointments have in them a need
Greater than shows itself at the first view
To you that know them not. This to my mother:
Giving a letter
'Twill be two days ere I shall see you, so
I leave you to your wisdom.
Sir, I can nothing say,
But that I am your most obedient servant.
Come, come, no more of that.
And ever shall
With true observance seek to eke out that
Wherein toward me my homely stars have fail'd
To equal my great fortune.
Let that go:
My haste is very great: farewell
Pray, sir, your pardon.
Well, what would you say?
I am not worthy of the wealth I owe,
Nor dare I say 'tis mine, and yet it is
But, like a timorous thief, most fain would steal
What law does vouch mine own.
What would you have?
Something
I would not tell you what I would, my lord:
Faith yes
Strangers and foes do sunder, and not kiss.
I pray you, stay not, but in haste to horse.
I shall not break your bidding, good my lord.
Where are my other men, monsieur? Farewell.
Exit HELENA
Go thou toward home
Whilst I can shake my sword or hear the drum.
Away, and for our flight.
Bravely, coragio!
Exeunt
ACT III
SCENE I. Florence. The DUKE's palace.
Flourish. Enter the DUKE of Florence attended
So that from point to point now have you heard
The fundamental reasons of this war,
Whose great decision hath much blood let forth
And more thirsts after.
Holy seems the quarrel
Upon your grace's part
On the opposer.
Therefore we marvel much our cousin France
Would in so just a business shut his bosom
Against our borrowing prayers.
Good my lord,
The reasons of our state I cannot yield,
But like a common and an outward man,
That the great figure of a council frames
By self-unable motion: therefore dare not
Say what I think of it, since I have found
Myself in my incertain grounds to fail
As often as I guess'd.
Be it his pleasure.
But I am sure the younger of our nature,
That surfeit on their ease, will day by day
Come here for physic.
Welcome shall they be
And all the honours that can fly from us
Shall on them settle. You know your places well
When better fall, for your avails they fell:
To-morrow to the field.
Flourish. Exeunt
SCENE II. Rousillon. The COUNT's palace.
Enter COUNTESS and Clown
It hath happened all as I would have had it, save
that he comes not along with her.
By my troth, I take my young lord to be a very
melancholy man.
By what observance, I pray you?
Why, he will look upon his boot and sing
ruff and sing
teeth and sing. I know a man that had this trick of
melancholy sold a goodly manor for a song.
Let me see what he writes, and when he means to come.
Opening a letter
I have no mind to Isbel since I was at court: our
old ling and our Isbels o' the country are nothing
like your old ling and your Isbels o' the court:
the brains of my Cupid's knocked out, and I begin to
love, as an old man loves money, with no stomach.
What have we here?
E'en that you have there.
Exit
[Reads]  I have sent you a daughter-in-law: she hath
recovered the king, and undone me. I have wedded
her, not bedded her
eternal. You shall hear I am run away: know it
before the report come. If there be breadth enough
in the world, I will hold a long distance. My duty
to you.	Your unfortunate son,
BERTRAM.
This is not well, rash and unbridled boy.
To fly the favours of so good a king
To pluck his indignation on thy head
By the misprising of a maid too virtuous
For the contempt of empire.
Re-enter Clown
O madam, yonder is heavy news within between two
soldiers and my young lady!
What is the matter?
Nay, there is some comfort in the news, some
comfort
thought he would.
Why should he be killed?
So say I, madam, if he run away, as I hear he does:
the danger is in standing to't
men, though it be the getting of children. Here
they come will tell you more: for my part, I only
hear your son was run away.
Exit
Enter HELENA, and two Gentlemen
Save you, good madam.
Madam, my lord is gone, for ever gone.
Do not say so.
Think upon patience. Pray you, gentlemen,
I have felt so many quirks of joy and grief,
That the first face of neither, on the start,
Can woman me unto't: where is my son, I pray you?
Madam, he's gone to serve the duke of Florence:
We met him thitherward
And, after some dispatch in hand at court,
Thither we bend again.
Look on his letter, madam
Reads
When thou canst get the ring upon my finger which
never shall come off, and show me a child begotten
of thy body that I am father to, then call me
husband: but in such a 'then' I write a 'never.'
This is a dreadful sentence.
Brought you this letter, gentlemen?
Ay, madam
And for the contents' sake are sorry for our pain.
I prithee, lady, have a better cheer
If thou engrossest all the griefs are thine,
Thou robb'st me of a moiety: he was my son
But I do wash his name out of my blood,
And thou art all my child. Towards Florence is he?
Ay, madam.
And to be a soldier?
Such is his noble purpose
The duke will lay upon him all the honour
That good convenience claims.
Return you thither?
Ay, madam, with the swiftest wing of speed.
[Reads]  Till I have no wife I have nothing in France.
'Tis bitter.
Find you that there?
Ay, madam.
'Tis but the boldness of his hand, haply, which his
heart was not consenting to.
Nothing in France, until he have no wife!
There's nothing here that is too good for him
But only she
That twenty such rude boys might tend upon
And call her hourly mistress. Who was with him?
A servant only, and a gentleman
Which I have sometime known.
Parolles, was it not?
Ay, my good lady, he.
A very tainted fellow, and full of wickedness.
My son corrupts a well-derived nature
With his inducement.
Indeed, good lady,
The fellow has a deal of that too much,
Which holds him much to have.
You're welcome, gentlemen.
I will entreat you, when you see my son,
To tell him that his sword can never win
The honour that he loses: more I'll entreat you
Written to bear along.
We serve you, madam,
In that and all your worthiest affairs.
Not so, but as we change our courtesies.
Will you draw near!
Exeunt COUNTESS and Gentlemen
'Till I have no wife, I have nothing in France.'
Nothing in France, until he has no wife!
Thou shalt have none, Rousillon, none in France
Then hast thou all again. Poor lord! is't I
That chase thee from thy country and expose
Those tender limbs of thine to the event
Of the none-sparing war? and is it I
That drive thee from the sportive court, where thou
Wast shot at with fair eyes, to be the mark
Of smoky muskets? O you leaden messengers,
That ride upon the violent speed of fire,
Fly with false aim
That sings with piercing
Whoever shoots at him, I set him there
Whoever charges on his forward breast,
I am the caitiff that do hold him to't
And, though I kill him not, I am the cause
His death was so effected: better 'twere
I met the ravin lion when he roar'd
With sharp constraint of hunger
That all the miseries which nature owes
Were mine at once. No, come thou home, Rousillon,
Whence honour but of danger wins a scar,
As oft it loses all: I will be gone
My being here it is that holds thee hence:
Shall I stay here to do't?  no, no, although
The air of paradise did fan the house
And angels officed all: I will be gone,
That pitiful rumour may report my flight,
To consolate thine ear. Come, night
For with the dark, poor thief, I'll steal away.
Exit
SCENE III. Florence. Before the DUKE's palace.
Flourish. Enter the DUKE of Florence, BERTRAM, PAROLLES, Soldiers, Drum, and Trumpets
The general of our horse thou art
Great in our hope, lay our best love and credence
Upon thy promising fortune.
Sir, it is
A charge too heavy for my strength, but yet
We'll strive to bear it for your worthy sake
To the extreme edge of hazard.
Then go thou forth
And fortune play upon thy prosperous helm,
As thy auspicious mistress!
This very day,
Great Mars, I put myself into thy file:
Make me but like my thoughts, and I shall prove
A lover of thy drum, hater of love.
Exeunt
SCENE IV. Rousillon. The COUNT's palace.
Enter COUNTESS and Steward
Alas! and would you take the letter of her?
Might you not know she would do as she has done,
By sending me a letter? Read it again.
[Reads]
I am Saint Jaques' pilgrim, thither gone:
Ambitious love hath so in me offended,
That barefoot plod I the cold ground upon,
With sainted vow my faults to have amended.
Write, write, that from the bloody course of war
My dearest master, your dear son, may hie:
Bless him at home in peace, whilst I from far
His name with zealous fervor sanctify:
His taken labours bid him me forgive
I, his despiteful Juno, sent him forth
From courtly friends, with camping foes to live,
Where death and danger dogs the heels of worth:
He is too good and fair for death and me:
Whom I myself embrace, to set him free.
Ah, what sharp stings are in her mildest words!
Rinaldo, you did never lack advice so much,
As letting her pass so: had I spoke with her,
I could have well diverted her intents,
Which thus she hath prevented.
Pardon me, madam:
If I had given you this at over-night,
She might have been o'erta'en
Pursuit would be but vain.
What angel shall
Bless this unworthy husband? he cannot thrive,
Unless her prayers, whom heaven delights to hear
And loves to grant, reprieve him from the wrath
Of greatest justice. Write, write, Rinaldo,
To this unworthy husband of his wife
Let every word weigh heavy of her worth
That he does weigh too light: my greatest grief.
Though little he do feel it, set down sharply.
Dispatch the most convenient messenger:
When haply he shall hear that she is gone,
He will return
Hearing so much, will speed her foot again,
Led hither by pure love: which of them both
Is dearest to me. I have no skill in sense
To make distinction: provide this messenger:
My heart is heavy and mine age is weak
Grief would have tears, and sorrow bids me speak.
Exeunt
SCENE V. Florence. Without the walls. A tucket afar off.
Enter an old Widow of Florence, DIANA, VIOLENTA, and MARIANA, with other Citizens
Nay, come
shall lose all the sight.
They say the French count has done most honourable service.
It is reported that he has taken their greatest
commander
duke's brother.
Tucket
We have lost our labour
way: hark! you may know by their trumpets.
Come, let's return again, and suffice ourselves with
the report of it. Well, Diana, take heed of this
French earl: the honour of a maid is her name
no legacy is so rich as honesty.
I have told my neighbour how you have been solicited
by a gentleman his companion.
I know that knave
filthy officer he is in those suggestions for the
young earl. Beware of them, Diana
enticements, oaths, tokens, and all these engines of
lust, are not the things they go under: many a maid
hath been seduced by them
example, that so terrible shows in the wreck of
maidenhood, cannot for all that dissuade succession,
but that they are limed with the twigs that threaten
them. I hope I need not to advise you further
I hope your own grace will keep you where you are,
though there were no further danger known but the
modesty which is so lost.
You shall not need to fear me.
I hope so.
Enter HELENA, disguised like a Pilgrim
Look, here comes a pilgrim: I know she will lie at
my house
question her. God save you, pilgrim! whither are you bound?
To Saint Jaques le Grand.
Where do the palmers lodge, I do beseech you?
At the Saint Francis here beside the port.
Is this the way?
Ay, marry, is't.
A march afar
Hark you! they come this way.
If you will tarry, holy pilgrim,
But till the troops come by,
I will conduct you where you shall be lodged
The rather, for I think I know your hostess
As ample as myself.
Is it yourself?
If you shall please so, pilgrim.
I thank you, and will stay upon your leisure.
You came, I think, from France?
I did so.
Here you shall see a countryman of yours
That has done worthy service.
His name, I pray you.
The Count Rousillon: know you such a one?
But by the ear, that hears most nobly of him:
His face I know not.
Whatsome'er he is,
He's bravely taken here. He stole from France,
As 'tis reported, for the king had married him
Against his liking: think you it is so?
Ay, surely, mere the truth: I know his lady.
There is a gentleman that serves the count
Reports but coarsely of her.
What's his name?
Monsieur Parolles.
O, I believe with him,
In argument of praise, or to the worth
Of the great count himself, she is too mean
To have her name repeated: all her deserving
Is a reserved honesty, and that
I have not heard examined.
Alas, poor lady!
'Tis a hard bondage to become the wife
Of a detesting lord.
I warrant, good creature, wheresoe'er she is,
Her heart weighs sadly: this young maid might do her
A shrewd turn, if she pleased.
How do you mean?
May be the amorous count solicits her
In the unlawful purpose.
He does indeed
And brokes with all that can in such a suit
Corrupt the tender honour of a maid:
But she is arm'd for him and keeps her guard
In honestest defence.
The gods forbid else!
So, now they come:
Drum and Colours
Enter BERTRAM, PAROLLES, and the whole army
That is Antonio, the duke's eldest son
That, Escalus.
Which is the Frenchman?
He
That with the plume: 'tis a most gallant fellow.
I would he loved his wife: if he were honester
He were much goodlier: is't not a handsome gentleman?
I like him well.
'Tis pity he is not honest: yond's that same knave
That leads him to these places: were I his lady,
I would Poison that vile rascal.
Which is he?
That jack-an-apes with scarfs: why is he melancholy?
Perchance he's hurt i' the battle.
Lose our drum! well.
He's shrewdly vexed at something: look, he has spied us.
Marry, hang you!
And your courtesy, for a ring-carrier!
Exeunt BERTRAM, PAROLLES, and army
The troop is past. Come, pilgrim, I will bring you
Where you shall host: of enjoin'd penitents
There's four or five, to great Saint Jaques bound,
Already at my house.
I humbly thank you:
Please it this matron and this gentle maid
To eat with us to-night, the charge and thanking
Shall be for me
I will bestow some precepts of this virgin
Worthy the note.
We'll take your offer kindly.
Exeunt
SCENE VI. Camp before Florence.
Enter BERTRAM and the two French Lords
Nay, good my lord, put him to't
way.
If your lordship find him not a hilding, hold me no
more in your respect.
On my life, my lord, a bubble.
Do you think I am so far deceived in him?
Believe it, my lord, in mine own direct knowledge,
without any malice, but to speak of him as my
kinsman, he's a most notable coward, an infinite and
endless liar, an hourly promise-breaker, the owner
of no one good quality worthy your lordship's
entertainment.
It were fit you knew him
his virtue, which he hath not, he might at some
great and trusty business in a main danger fail you.
I would I knew in what particular action to try him.
None better than to let him fetch off his drum,
which you hear him so confidently undertake to do.
I, with a troop of Florentines, will suddenly
surprise him
knows not from the enemy: we will bind and hoodwink
him so, that he shall suppose no other but that he
is carried into the leaguer of the adversaries, when
we bring him to our own tents. Be but your lordship
present at his examination: if he do not, for the
promise of his life and in the highest compulsion of
base fear, offer to betray you and deliver all the
intelligence in his power against you, and that with
the divine forfeit of his soul upon oath, never
trust my judgment in any thing.
O, for the love of laughter, let him fetch his drum
he says he has a stratagem for't: when your
lordship sees the bottom of his success in't, and to
what metal this counterfeit lump of ore will be
melted, if you give him not John Drum's
entertainment, your inclining cannot be removed.
Here he comes.
Enter PAROLLES
[Aside to BERTRAM]  O, for the love of laughter,
hinder not the honour of his design: let him fetch
off his drum in any hand.
How now, monsieur! this drum sticks sorely in your
disposition.
A pox on't, let it go
'But a drum'! is't 'but a drum'? A drum so lost!
There was excellent command,--to charge in with our
horse upon our own wings, and to rend our own soldiers!
That was not to be blamed in the command of the
service: it was a disaster of war that Caesar
himself could not have prevented, if he had been
there to command.
Well, we cannot greatly condemn our success: some
dishonour we had in the loss of that drum
not to be recovered.
It might have been recovered.
It might
It is to be recovered: but that the merit of
service is seldom attributed to the true and exact
performer, I would have that drum or another, or
'hic jacet.'
Why, if you have a stomach, to't, monsieur: if you
think your mystery in stratagem can bring this
instrument of honour again into his native quarter,
be magnanimous in the enterprise and go on
grace the attempt for a worthy exploit: if you
speed well in it, the duke shall both speak of it.
and extend to you what further becomes his
greatness, even to the utmost syllable of your
worthiness.
By the hand of a soldier, I will undertake it.
But you must not now slumber in it.
I'll about it this evening: and I will presently
pen down my dilemmas, encourage myself in my
certainty, put myself into my mortal preparation
and by midnight look to hear further from me.
May I be bold to acquaint his grace you are gone about it?
I know not what the success will be, my lord
the attempt I vow.
I know thou'rt valiant
thy soldiership, will subscribe for thee. Farewell.
I love not many words.
Exit
No more than a fish loves water. Is not this a
strange fellow, my lord, that so confidently seems
to undertake this business, which he knows is not to
be done
damned than to do't?
You do not know him, my lord, as we do: certain it
is that he will steal himself into a man's favour and
for a week escape a great deal of discoveries
when you find him out, you have him ever after.
Why, do you think he will make no deed at all of
this that so seriously he does address himself unto?
None in the world
clap upon you two or three probable lies: but we
have almost embossed him
to-night
We'll make you some sport with the fox ere we case
him. He was first smoked by the old lord Lafeu:
when his disguise and he is parted, tell me what a
sprat you shall find him
very night.
I must go look my twigs: he shall be caught.
Your brother he shall go along with me.
As't please your lordship: I'll leave you.
Exit
Now will I lead you to the house, and show you
The lass I spoke of.
But you say she's honest.
That's all the fault: I spoke with her but once
And found her wondrous cold
By this same coxcomb that we have i' the wind,
Tokens and letters which she did re-send
And this is all I have done. She's a fair creature:
Will you go see her?
With all my heart, my lord.
Exeunt
SCENE VII. Florence. The Widow's house.
Enter HELENA and Widow
If you misdoubt me that I am not she,
I know not how I shall assure you further,
But I shall lose the grounds I work upon.
Though my estate be fallen, I was well born,
Nothing acquainted with these businesses
And would not put my reputation now
In any staining act.
Nor would I wish you.
First, give me trust, the count he is my husband,
And what to your sworn counsel I have spoken
Is so from word to word
By the good aid that I of you shall borrow,
Err in bestowing it.
I should believe you:
For you have show'd me that which well approves
You're great in fortune.
Take this purse of gold,
And let me buy your friendly help thus far,
Which I will over-pay and pay again
When I have found it. The count he wooes your daughter,
Lays down his wanton siege before her beauty,
Resolved to carry her: let her in fine consent,
As we'll direct her how 'tis best to bear it.
Now his important blood will nought deny
That she'll demand: a ring the county wears,
That downward hath succeeded in his house
From son to son, some four or five descents
Since the first father wore it: this ring he holds
In most rich choice
To buy his will, it would not seem too dear,
Howe'er repented after.
Now I see
The bottom of your purpose.
You see it lawful, then: it is no more,
But that your daughter, ere she seems as won,
Desires this ring
In fine, delivers me to fill the time,
Herself most chastely absent: after this,
To marry her, I'll add three thousand crowns
To what is passed already.
I have yielded:
Instruct my daughter how she shall persever,
That time and place with this deceit so lawful
May prove coherent. Every night he comes
With musics of all sorts and songs composed
To her unworthiness: it nothing steads us
To chide him from our eaves
As if his life lay on't.
Why then to-night
Let us assay our plot
Is wicked meaning in a lawful deed
And lawful meaning in a lawful act,
Where both not sin, and yet a sinful fact:
But let's about it.
Exeunt
ACT IV
SCENE I. Without the Florentine camp.
Enter Second French Lord, with five or six other Soldiers in ambush
He can come no other way but by this hedge-corner.
When you sally upon him, speak what terrible
language you will: though you understand it not
yourselves, no matter
understand him, unless some one among us whom we
must produce for an interpreter.
Good captain, let me be the interpreter.
Art not acquainted with him? knows he not thy voice?
No, sir, I warrant you.
But what linsey-woolsey hast thou to speak to us again?
E'en such as you speak to me.
He must think us some band of strangers i' the
adversary's entertainment. Now he hath a smack of
all neighbouring languages
one be a man of his own fancy, not to know what we
speak one to another
know straight our purpose: choughs' language,
gabble enough, and good enough. As for you,
interpreter, you must seem very politic. But couch,
ho! here he comes, to beguile two hours in a sleep,
and then to return and swear the lies he forges.
Enter PAROLLES
Ten o'clock: within these three hours 'twill be
time enough to go home. What shall I say I have
done? It must be a very plausive invention that
carries it: they begin to smoke me
have of late knocked too often at my door. I find
my tongue is too foolhardy
fear of Mars before it and of his creatures, not
daring the reports of my tongue.
This is the first truth that e'er thine own tongue
was guilty of.
What the devil should move me to undertake the
recovery of this drum, being not ignorant of the
impossibility, and knowing I had no such purpose? I
must give myself some hurts, and say I got them in
exploit: yet slight ones will not carry it
will say, 'Came you off with so little?' and great
ones I dare not give. Wherefore, what's the
instance? Tongue, I must put you into a
butter-woman's mouth and buy myself another of
Bajazet's mule, if you prattle me into these perils.
Is it possible he should know what he is, and be
that he is?
I would the cutting of my garments would serve the
turn, or the breaking of my Spanish sword.
We cannot afford you so.
Or the baring of my beard
stratagem.
'Twould not do.
Or to drown my clothes, and say I was stripped.
Hardly serve.
Though I swore I leaped from the window of the citadel.
How deep?
Thirty fathom.
Three great oaths would scarce make that be believed.
I would I had any drum of the enemy's: I would swear
I recovered it.
You shall hear one anon.
A drum now of the enemy's,--
Alarum within
Throca movousus, cargo, cargo, cargo.
Cargo, cargo, cargo, villiando par corbo, cargo.
O, ransom, ransom! do not hide mine eyes.
They seize and blindfold him
Boskos thromuldo boskos.
I know you are the Muskos' regiment:
And I shall lose my life for want of language
If there be here German, or Dane, low Dutch,
Italian, or French, let him speak to me
Discover that which shall undo the Florentine.
Boskos vauvado: I understand thee, and can speak
thy tongue. Kerely bonto, sir, betake thee to thy
faith, for seventeen poniards are at thy bosom.
O!
O, pray, pray, pray! Manka revania dulche.
Oscorbidulchos volivorco.
The general is content to spare thee yet
And, hoodwink'd as thou art, will lead thee on
To gather from thee: haply thou mayst inform
Something to save thy life.
O, let me live!
And all the secrets of our camp I'll show,
Their force, their purposes
Which you will wonder at.
But wilt thou faithfully?
If I do not, damn me.
Acordo linta.
Come on
Exit, with PAROLLES guarded. A short alarum within
Go, tell the Count Rousillon, and my brother,
We have caught the woodcock, and will keep him muffled
Till we do hear from them.
Captain, I will.
A' will betray us all unto ourselves:
Inform on that.
So I will, sir.
Till then I'll keep him dark and safely lock'd.
Exeunt
SCENE II. Florence. The Widow's house.
Enter BERTRAM and DIANA
They told me that your name was Fontibell.
No, my good lord, Diana.
Titled goddess
And worth it, with addition! But, fair soul,
In your fine frame hath love no quality?
If quick fire of youth light not your mind,
You are no maiden, but a monument:
When you are dead, you should be such a one
As you are now, for you are cold and stem
And now you should be as your mother was
When your sweet self was got.
She then was honest.
So should you be.
No:
My mother did but duty
As you owe to your wife.
No more o' that
I prithee, do not strive against my vows:
I was compell'd to her
By love's own sweet constraint, and will for ever
Do thee all rights of service.
Ay, so you serve us
Till we serve you
You barely leave our thorns to prick ourselves
And mock us with our bareness.
How have I sworn!
'Tis not the many oaths that makes the truth,
But the plain single vow that is vow'd true.
What is not holy, that we swear not by,
But take the High'st to witness: then, pray you, tell me,
If I should swear by God's great attributes,
I loved you dearly, would you believe my oaths,
When I did love you ill? This has no holding,
To swear by him whom I protest to love,
That I will work against him: therefore your oaths
Are words and poor conditions, but unseal'd,
At least in my opinion.
Change it, change it
Be not so holy-cruel: love is holy
And my integrity ne'er knew the crafts
That you do charge men with. Stand no more off,
But give thyself unto my sick desires,
Who then recover: say thou art mine, and ever
My love as it begins shall so persever.
I see that men make ropes in such a scarre
That we'll forsake ourselves. Give me that ring.
I'll lend it thee, my dear
To give it from me.
Will you not, my lord?
It is an honour 'longing to our house,
Bequeathed down from many ancestors
Which were the greatest obloquy i' the world
In me to lose.
Mine honour's such a ring:
My chastity's the jewel of our house,
Bequeathed down from many ancestors
Which were the greatest obloquy i' the world
In me to lose: thus your own proper wisdom
Brings in the champion Honour on my part,
Against your vain assault.
Here, take my ring:
My house, mine honour, yea, my life, be thine,
And I'll be bid by thee.
When midnight comes, knock at my chamber-window:
I'll order take my mother shall not hear.
Now will I charge you in the band of truth,
When you have conquer'd my yet maiden bed,
Remain there but an hour, nor speak to me:
My reasons are most strong
When back again this ring shall be deliver'd:
And on your finger in the night I'll put
Another ring, that what in time proceeds
May token to the future our past deeds.
Adieu, till then
A wife of me, though there my hope be done.
A heaven on earth I have won by wooing thee.
Exit
For which live long to thank both heaven and me!
You may so in the end.
My mother told me just how he would woo,
As if she sat in 's heart
Have the like oaths: he had sworn to marry me
When his wife's dead
When I am buried. Since Frenchmen are so braid,
Marry that will, I live and die a maid:
Only in this disguise I think't no sin
To cozen him that would unjustly win.
Exit
SCENE III. The Florentine camp.
Enter the two French Lords and some two or three Soldiers
You have not given him his mother's letter?
I have delivered it an hour since: there is
something in't that stings his nature
reading it he changed almost into another man.
He has much worthy blame laid upon him for shaking
off so good a wife and so sweet a lady.
Especially he hath incurred the everlasting
displeasure of the king, who had even tuned his
bounty to sing happiness to him. I will tell you a
thing, but you shall let it dwell darkly with you.
When you have spoken it, 'tis dead, and I am the
grave of it.
He hath perverted a young gentlewoman here in
Florence, of a most chaste renown
fleshes his will in the spoil of her honour: he hath
given her his monumental ring, and thinks himself
made in the unchaste composition.
Now, God delay our rebellion! as we are ourselves,
what things are we!
Merely our own traitors. And as in the common course
of all treasons, we still see them reveal
themselves, till they attain to their abhorred ends,
so he that in this action contrives against his own
nobility, in his proper stream o'erflows himself.
Is it not meant damnable in us, to be trumpeters of
our unlawful intents? We shall not then have his
company to-night?
Not till after midnight
That approaches apace
his company anatomized, that he might take a measure
of his own judgments, wherein so curiously he had
set this counterfeit.
We will not meddle with him till he come
presence must be the whip of the other.
In the mean time, what hear you of these wars?
I hear there is an overture of peace.
Nay, I assure you, a peace concluded.
What will Count Rousillon do then? will he travel
higher, or return again into France?
I perceive, by this demand, you are not altogether
of his council.
Let it be forbid, sir
of his act.
Sir, his wife some two months since fled from his
house: her pretence is a pilgrimage to Saint Jaques
le Grand
sanctimony she accomplished
tenderness of her nature became as a prey to her
grief
now she sings in heaven.
How is this justified?
The stronger part of it by her own letters, which
makes her story true, even to the point of her
death: her death itself, which could not be her
office to say is come, was faithfully confirmed by
the rector of the place.
Hath the count all this intelligence?
Ay, and the particular confirmations, point from
point, so to the full arming of the verity.
I am heartily sorry that he'll be glad of this.
How mightily sometimes we make us comforts of our losses!
And how mightily some other times we drown our gain
in tears! The great dignity that his valour hath
here acquired for him shall at home be encountered
with a shame as ample.
The web of our life is of a mingled yarn, good and
ill together: our virtues would be proud, if our
faults whipped them not
despair, if they were not cherished by our virtues.
Enter a Messenger
How now! where's your master?
He met the duke in the street, sir, of whom he hath
taken a solemn leave: his lordship will next
morning for France. The duke hath offered him
letters of commendations to the king.
They shall be no more than needful there, if they
were more than they can commend.
They cannot be too sweet for the king's tartness.
Here's his lordship now.
Enter BERTRAM
How now, my lord! is't not after midnight?
I have to-night dispatched sixteen businesses, a
month's length a-piece, by an abstract of success:
I have congied with the duke, done my adieu with his
nearest
lady mother I am returning
and between these main parcels of dispatch effected
many nicer needs
that I have not ended yet.
If the business be of any difficulty, and this
morning your departure hence, it requires haste of
your lordship.
I mean, the business is not ended, as fearing to
hear of it hereafter. But shall we have this
dialogue between the fool and the soldier? Come,
bring forth this counterfeit module, he has deceived
me, like a double-meaning prophesier.
Bring him forth: has sat i' the stocks all night,
poor gallant knave.
No matter: his heels have deserved it, in usurping
his spurs so long. How does he carry himself?
I have told your lordship already, the stocks carry
him. But to answer you as you would be understood
he weeps like a wench that had shed her milk: he
hath confessed himself to Morgan, whom he supposes
to be a friar, from the time of his remembrance to
this very instant disaster of his setting i' the
stocks: and what think you he hath confessed?
Nothing of me, has a'?
His confession is taken, and it shall be read to his
face: if your lordship be in't, as I believe you
are, you must have the patience to hear it.
Enter PAROLLES guarded, and First Soldier
A plague upon him! muffled! he can say nothing of
me: hush, hush!
Hoodman comes! Portotartarosa
He calls for the tortures: what will you say
without 'em?
I will confess what I know without constraint: if
ye pinch me like a pasty, I can say no more.
Bosko chimurcho.
Boblibindo chicurmurco.
You are a merciful general. Our general bids you
answer to what I shall ask you out of a note.
And truly, as I hope to live.
[Reads]  'First demand of him how many horse the
duke is strong.' What say you to that?
Five or six thousand
unserviceable: the troops are all scattered, and
the commanders very poor rogues, upon my reputation
and credit and as I hope to live.
Shall I set down your answer so?
Do: I'll take the sacrament on't, how and which way you will.
All's one to him. What a past-saving slave is this!
You're deceived, my lord: this is Monsieur
Parolles, the gallant militarist,--that was his own
phrase,--that had the whole theoric of war in the
knot of his scarf, and the practise in the chape of
his dagger.
I will never trust a man again for keeping his sword
clean. nor believe he can have every thing in him
by wearing his apparel neatly.
Well, that's set down.
Five or six thousand horse, I said,-- I will say
true,--or thereabouts, set down, for I'll speak truth.
He's very near the truth in this.
But I con him no thanks for't, in the nature he
delivers it.
Poor rogues, I pray you, say.
Well, that's set down.
I humbly thank you, sir: a truth's a truth, the
rogues are marvellous poor.
[Reads]  'Demand of him, of what strength they are
a-foot.' What say you to that?
By my troth, sir, if I were to live this present
hour, I will tell true. Let me see: Spurio, a
hundred and fifty
many
and Gratii, two hundred and fifty each
company, Chitopher, Vaumond, Bentii, two hundred and
fifty each: so that the muster-file, rotten and
sound, upon my life, amounts not to fifteen thousand
poll
their cassocks, lest they shake themselves to pieces.
What shall be done to him?
Nothing, but let him have thanks. Demand of him my
condition, and what credit I have with the duke.
Well, that's set down.
Reads
'You shall demand of him, whether one Captain Dumain
be i' the camp, a Frenchman
with the duke
expertness in wars
possible, with well-weighing sums of gold, to
corrupt him to revolt.' What say you to this? what
do you know of it?
I beseech you, let me answer to the particular of
the inter'gatories: demand them singly.
Do you know this Captain Dumain?
I know him: a' was a botcher's 'prentice in Paris,
from whence he was whipped for getting the shrieve's
fool with child,--a dumb innocent, that could not
say him nay.
Nay, by your leave, hold your hands
his brains are forfeit to the next tile that falls.
Well, is this captain in the duke of Florence's camp?
Upon my knowledge, he is, and lousy.
Nay look not so upon me
lordship anon.
What is his reputation with the duke?
The duke knows him for no other but a poor officer
of mine
out o' the band: I think I have his letter in my pocket.
Marry, we'll search.
In good sadness, I do not know
or it is upon a file with the duke's other letters
in my tent.
Here 'tis
I do not know if it be it or no.
Our interpreter does it well.
Excellently.
[Reads]  'Dian, the count's a fool, and full of gold,'--
That is not the duke's letter, sir
advertisement to a proper maid in Florence, one
Diana, to take heed of the allurement of one Count
Rousillon, a foolish idle boy, but for all that very
ruttish: I pray you, sir, put it up again.
Nay, I'll read it first, by your favour.
My meaning in't, I protest, was very honest in the
behalf of the maid
a dangerous and lascivious boy, who is a whale to
virginity and devours up all the fry it finds.
Damnable both-sides rogue!
[Reads]  'When he swears oaths, bid him drop gold, and take it
After he scores, he never pays the score:
Half won is match well made
He ne'er pays after-debts, take it before
And say a soldier, Dian, told thee this,
Men are to mell with, boys are not to kiss:
For count of this, the count's a fool, I know it,
Who pays before, but not when he does owe it.
Thine, as he vowed to thee in thine ear,
PAROLLES.'
He shall be whipped through the army with this rhyme
in's forehead.
This is your devoted friend, sir, the manifold
linguist and the armipotent soldier.
I could endure any thing before but a cat, and now
he's a cat to me.
I perceive, sir, by the general's looks, we shall be
fain to hang you.
My life, sir, in any case: not that I am afraid to
die
repent out the remainder of nature: let me live,
sir, in a dungeon, i' the stocks, or any where, so I may live.
We'll see what may be done, so you confess freely
therefore, once more to this Captain Dumain: you
have answered to his reputation with the duke and to
his valour: what is his honesty?
He will steal, sir, an egg out of a cloister: for
rapes and ravishments he parallels Nessus: he
professes not keeping of oaths
is stronger than Hercules: he will lie, sir, with
such volubility, that you would think truth were a
fool: drunkenness is his best virtue, for he will
be swine-drunk
harm, save to his bed-clothes about him
know his conditions and lay him in straw. I have but
little more to say, sir, of his honesty: he has
every thing that an honest man should not have
an honest man should have, he has nothing.
I begin to love him for this.
For this description of thine honesty? A pox upon
him for me, he's more and more a cat.
What say you to his expertness in war?
Faith, sir, he has led the drum before the English
tragedians
his soldiership I know not
he had the honour to be the officer at a place there
called Mile-end, to instruct for the doubling of
files: I would do the man what honour I can, but of
this I am not certain.
He hath out-villained villany so far, that the
rarity redeems him.
A pox on him, he's a cat still.
His qualities being at this poor price, I need not
to ask you if gold will corrupt him to revolt.
Sir, for a quart d'ecu he will sell the fee-simple
of his salvation, the inheritance of it
entail from all remainders, and a perpetual
succession for it perpetually.
What's his brother, the other Captain Dumain?
Why does be ask him of me?
What's he?
E'en a crow o' the same nest
great as the first in goodness, but greater a great
deal in evil: he excels his brother for a coward,
yet his brother is reputed one of the best that is:
in a retreat he outruns any lackey
on he has the cramp.
If your life be saved, will you undertake to betray
the Florentine?
Ay, and the captain of his horse, Count Rousillon.
I'll whisper with the general, and know his pleasure.
[Aside]  I'll no more drumming
drums! Only to seem to deserve well, and to
beguile the supposition of that lascivious young boy
the count, have I run into this danger. Yet who
would have suspected an ambush where I was taken?
There is no remedy, sir, but you must die: the
general says, you that have so traitorously
discovered the secrets of your army and made such
pestiferous reports of men very nobly held, can
serve the world for no honest use
must die. Come, headsman, off with his head.
O Lord, sir, let me live, or let me see my death!
That shall you, and take your leave of all your friends.
Unblinding him
So, look about you: know you any here?
Good morrow, noble captain.
God bless you, Captain Parolles.
God save you, noble captain.
Captain, what greeting will you to my Lord Lafeu?
I am for France.
Good captain, will you give me a copy of the sonnet
you writ to Diana in behalf of the Count Rousillon?
an I were not a very coward, I'ld compel it of you:
but fare you well.
Exeunt BERTRAM and Lords
You are undone, captain, all but your scarf
has a knot on't yet
Who cannot be crushed with a plot?
If you could find out a country where but women were
that had received so much shame, you might begin an
impudent nation. Fare ye well, sir
too: we shall speak of you there.
Exit with Soldiers
Yet am I thankful: if my heart were great,
'Twould burst at this. Captain I'll be no more
But I will eat and drink, and sleep as soft
As captain shall: simply the thing I am
Shall make me live. Who knows himself a braggart,
Let him fear this, for it will come to pass
that every braggart shall be found an ass.
Rust, sword? cool, blushes! and, Parolles, live
Safest in shame! being fool'd, by foolery thrive!
There's place and means for every man alive.
I'll after them.
Exit
SCENE IV. Florence. The Widow's house.
Enter HELENA, Widow, and DIANA
That you may well perceive I have not wrong'd you,
One of the greatest in the Christian world
Shall be my surety
Ere I can perfect mine intents, to kneel:
Time was, I did him a desired office,
Dear almost as his life
Through flinty Tartar's bosom would peep forth,
And answer, thanks: I duly am inform'd
His grace is at Marseilles
We have convenient convoy. You must know
I am supposed dead: the army breaking,
My husband hies him home
And by the leave of my good lord the king,
We'll be before our welcome.
Gentle madam,
You never had a servant to whose trust
Your business was more welcome.
Nor you, mistress,
Ever a friend whose thoughts more truly labour
To recompense your love: doubt not but heaven
Hath brought me up to be your daughter's dower,
As it hath fated her to be my motive
And helper to a husband. But, O strange men!
That can such sweet use make of what they hate,
When saucy trusting of the cozen'd thoughts
Defiles the pitchy night: so lust doth play
With what it loathes for that which is away.
But more of this hereafter. You, Diana,
Under my poor instructions yet must suffer
Something in my behalf.
Let death and honesty
Go with your impositions, I am yours
Upon your will to suffer.
Yet, I pray you:
But with the word the time will bring on summer,
When briers shall have leaves as well as thorns,
And be as sweet as sharp. We must away
Our wagon is prepared, and time revives us:
All's well that ends well
Whate'er the course, the end is the renown.
Exeunt
SCENE V. Rousillon. The COUNT's palace.
Enter COUNTESS, LAFEU, and Clown
No, no, no, your son was misled with a snipt-taffeta
fellow there, whose villanous saffron would have
made all the unbaked and doughy youth of a nation in
his colour: your daughter-in-law had been alive at
this hour, and your son here at home, more advanced
by the king than by that red-tailed humble-bee I speak of.
I would I had not known him
most virtuous gentlewoman that ever nature had
praise for creating. If she had partaken of my
flesh, and cost me the dearest groans of a mother, I
could not have owed her a more rooted love.
'Twas a good lady, 'twas a good lady: we may pick a
thousand salads ere we light on such another herb.
Indeed, sir, she was the sweet marjoram of the
salad, or rather, the herb of grace.
They are not herbs, you knave
I am no great Nebuchadnezzar, sir
skill in grass.
Whether dost thou profess thyself, a knave or a fool?
A fool, sir, at a woman's service, and a knave at a man's.
Your distinction?
I would cozen the man of his wife and do his service.
So you were a knave at his service, indeed.
And I would give his wife my bauble, sir, to do her service.
I will subscribe for thee, thou art both knave and fool.
At your service.
No, no, no.
Why, sir, if I cannot serve you, I can serve as
great a prince as you are.
Who's that? a Frenchman?
Faith, sir, a' has an English name
is more hotter in France than there.
What prince is that?
The black prince, sir
darkness
Hold thee, there's my purse: I give thee not this
to suggest thee from thy master thou talkest of
serve him still.
I am a woodland fellow, sir, that always loved a
great fire
good fire. But, sure, he is the prince of the
world
the house with the narrow gate, which I take to be
too little for pomp to enter: some that humble
themselves may
tender, and they'll be for the flowery way that
leads to the broad gate and the great fire.
Go thy ways, I begin to be aweary of thee
tell thee so before, because I would not fall out
with thee. Go thy ways: let my horses be well
looked to, without any tricks.
If I put any tricks upon 'em, sir, they shall be
jades' tricks
Exit
A shrewd knave and an unhappy.
So he is. My lord that's gone made himself much
sport out of him: by his authority he remains here,
which he thinks is a patent for his sauciness
indeed, he has no pace, but runs where he will.
I like him well
tell you, since I heard of the good lady's death and
that my lord your son was upon his return home, I
moved the king my master to speak in the behalf of
my daughter
his majesty, out of a self-gracious remembrance, did
first propose: his highness hath promised me to do
it: and, to stop up the displeasure he hath
conceived against your son, there is no fitter
matter. How does your ladyship like it?
With very much content, my lord
happily effected.
His highness comes post from Marseilles, of as able
body as when he numbered thirty: he will be here
to-morrow, or I am deceived by him that in such
intelligence hath seldom failed.
It rejoices me, that I hope I shall see him ere I
die. I have letters that my son will be here
to-night: I shall beseech your lordship to remain
with me till they meet together.
Madam, I was thinking with what manners I might
safely be admitted.
You need but plead your honourable privilege.
Lady, of that I have made a bold charter
thank my God it holds yet.
Re-enter Clown
O madam, yonder's my lord your son with a patch of
velvet on's face: whether there be a scar under't
or no, the velvet knows
velvet: his left cheek is a cheek of two pile and a
half, but his right cheek is worn bare.
A scar nobly got, or a noble scar, is a good livery
of honour
But it is your carbonadoed face.
Let us go see your son, I pray you: I long to talk
with the young noble soldier.
Faith there's a dozen of 'em, with delicate fine
hats and most courteous feathers, which bow the head
and nod at every man.
Exeunt
ACT V
SCENE I. Marseilles. A street.
Enter HELENA, Widow, and DIANA, with two Attendants
But this exceeding posting day and night
Must wear your spirits low
But since you have made the days and nights as one,
To wear your gentle limbs in my affairs,
Be bold you do so grow in my requital
As nothing can unroot you. In happy time
Enter a Gentleman
This man may help me to his majesty's ear,
If he would spend his power. God save you, sir.
And you.
Sir, I have seen you in the court of France.
I have been sometimes there.
I do presume, sir, that you are not fallen
From the report that goes upon your goodness
An therefore, goaded with most sharp occasions,
Which lay nice manners by, I put you to
The use of your own virtues, for the which
I shall continue thankful.
What's your will?
That it will please you
To give this poor petition to the king,
And aid me with that store of power you have
To come into his presence.
The king's not here.
Not here, sir!
Not, indeed:
He hence removed last night and with more haste
Than is his use.
Lord, how we lose our pains!
ALL'S WELL THAT ENDS WELL yet,
Though time seem so adverse and means unfit.
I do beseech you, whither is he gone?
Marry, as I take it, to Rousillon
Whither I am going.
I do beseech you, sir,
Since you are like to see the king before me,
Commend the paper to his gracious hand,
Which I presume shall render you no blame
But rather make you thank your pains for it.
I will come after you with what good speed
Our means will make us means.
This I'll do for you.
And you shall find yourself to be well thank'd,
Whate'er falls more. We must to horse again.
Go, go, provide.
Exeunt
SCENE II. Rousillon. Before the COUNT's palace.
Enter Clown, and PAROLLES, following
Good Monsieur Lavache, give my Lord Lafeu this
letter: I have ere now, sir, been better known to
you, when I have held familiarity with fresher
clothes
mood, and smell somewhat strong of her strong
displeasure.
Truly, fortune's displeasure is but sluttish, if it
smell so strongly as thou speakest of: I will
henceforth eat no fish of fortune's buttering.
Prithee, allow the wind.
Nay, you need not to stop your nose, sir
but by a metaphor.
Indeed, sir, if your metaphor stink, I will stop my
nose
thee further.
Pray you, sir, deliver me this paper.
Foh! prithee, stand away: a paper from fortune's
close-stool to give to a nobleman! Look, here he
comes himself.
Enter LAFEU
Here is a purr of fortune's, sir, or of fortune's
cat,--but not a musk-cat,--that has fallen into the
unclean fishpond of her displeasure, and, as he
says, is muddied withal: pray you, sir, use the
carp as you may
ingenious, foolish, rascally knave. I do pity his
distress in my similes of comfort and leave him to
your lordship.
Exit
My lord, I am a man whom fortune hath cruelly
scratched.
And what would you have me to do? 'Tis too late to
pare her nails now. Wherein have you played the
knave with fortune, that she should scratch you, who
of herself is a good lady and would not have knaves
thrive long under her? There's a quart d'ecu for
you: let the justices make you and fortune friends:
I am for other business.
I beseech your honour to hear me one single word.
You beg a single penny more: come, you shall ha't
save your word.
My name, my good lord, is Parolles.
You beg more than 'word,' then. Cox my passion!
give me your hand. How does your drum?
O my good lord, you were the first that found me!
Was I, in sooth? and I was the first that lost thee.
It lies in you, my lord, to bring me in some grace,
for you did bring me out.
Out upon thee, knave! dost thou put upon me at once
both the office of God and the devil? One brings
thee in grace and the other brings thee out.
Trumpets sound
The king's coming
inquire further after me
night: though you are a fool and a knave, you shall
eat
I praise God for you.
Exeunt
SCENE III. Rousillon. The COUNT's palace.
Flourish. Enter KING, COUNTESS, LAFEU, the two French Lords, with Attendants
We lost a jewel of her
Was made much poorer by it: but your son,
As mad in folly, lack'd the sense to know
Her estimation home.
'Tis past, my liege
And I beseech your majesty to make it
Natural rebellion, done i' the blaze of youth
When oil and fire, too strong for reason's force,
O'erbears it and burns on.
My honour'd lady,
I have forgiven and forgotten all
Though my revenges were high bent upon him,
And watch'd the time to shoot.
This I must say,
But first I beg my pardon, the young lord
Did to his majesty, his mother and his lady
Offence of mighty note
The greatest wrong of all. He lost a wife
Whose beauty did astonish the survey
Of richest eyes, whose words all ears took captive,
Whose dear perfection hearts that scorn'd to serve
Humbly call'd mistress.
Praising what is lost
Makes the remembrance dear. Well, call him hither
We are reconciled, and the first view shall kill
All repetition: let him not ask our pardon
The nature of his great offence is dead,
And deeper than oblivion we do bury
The incensing relics of it: let him approach,
A stranger, no offender
So 'tis our will he should.
I shall, my liege.
Exit
What says he to your daughter? have you spoke?
All that he is hath reference to your highness.
Then shall we have a match. I have letters sent me
That set him high in fame.
Enter BERTRAM
He looks well on't.
I am not a day of season,
For thou mayst see a sunshine and a hail
In me at once: but to the brightest beams
Distracted clouds give way
The time is fair again.
My high-repented blames,
Dear sovereign, pardon to me.
All is whole
Not one word more of the consumed time.
Let's take the instant by the forward top
For we are old, and on our quick'st decrees
The inaudible and noiseless foot of Time
Steals ere we can effect them. You remember
The daughter of this lord?
Admiringly, my liege, at first
I stuck my choice upon her, ere my heart
Durst make too bold a herald of my tongue
Where the impression of mine eye infixing,
Contempt his scornful perspective did lend me,
Which warp'd the line of every other favour
Scorn'd a fair colour, or express'd it stolen
Extended or contracted all proportions
To a most hideous object: thence it came
That she whom all men praised and whom myself,
Since I have lost, have loved, was in mine eye
The dust that did offend it.
Well excused:
That thou didst love her, strikes some scores away
From the great compt: but love that comes too late,
Like a remorseful pardon slowly carried,
To the great sender turns a sour offence,
Crying, 'That's good that's gone.' Our rash faults
Make trivial price of serious things we have,
Not knowing them until we know their grave:
Oft our displeasures, to ourselves unjust,
Destroy our friends and after weep their dust
Our own love waking cries to see what's done,
While shame full late sleeps out the afternoon.
Be this sweet Helen's knell, and now forget her.
Send forth your amorous token for fair Maudlin:
The main consents are had
To see our widower's second marriage-day.
Which better than the first, O dear heaven, bless!
Or, ere they meet, in me, O nature, cesse!
Come on, my son, in whom my house's name
Must be digested, give a favour from you
To sparkle in the spirits of my daughter,
That she may quickly come.
BERTRAM gives a ring
By my old beard,
And every hair that's on't, Helen, that's dead,
Was a sweet creature: such a ring as this,
The last that e'er I took her at court,
I saw upon her finger.
Hers it was not.
Now, pray you, let me see it
While I was speaking, oft was fasten'd to't.
This ring was mine
I bade her, if her fortunes ever stood
Necessitied to help, that by this token
I would relieve her. Had you that craft, to reave
her
Of what should stead her most?
My gracious sovereign,
Howe'er it pleases you to take it so,
The ring was never hers.
Son, on my life,
I have seen her wear it
At her life's rate.
I am sure I saw her wear it.
You are deceived, my lord
In Florence was it from a casement thrown me,
Wrapp'd in a paper, which contain'd the name
Of her that threw it: noble she was, and thought
I stood engaged: but when I had subscribed
To mine own fortune and inform'd her fully
I could not answer in that course of honour
As she had made the overture, she ceased
In heavy satisfaction and would never
Receive the ring again.
Plutus himself,
That knows the tinct and multiplying medicine,
Hath not in nature's mystery more science
Than I have in this ring: 'twas mine, 'twas Helen's,
Whoever gave it you. Then, if you know
That you are well acquainted with yourself,
Confess 'twas hers, and by what rough enforcement
You got it from her: she call'd the saints to surety
That she would never put it from her finger,
Unless she gave it to yourself in bed,
Where you have never come, or sent it us
Upon her great disaster.
She never saw it.
Thou speak'st it falsely, as I love mine honour
And makest conjectural fears to come into me
Which I would fain shut out. If it should prove
That thou art so inhuman,--'twill not prove so
And yet I know not: thou didst hate her deadly,
And she is dead
Her eyes myself, could win me to believe,
More than to see this ring. Take him away.
Guards seize BERTRAM
My fore-past proofs, howe'er the matter fall,
Shall tax my fears of little vanity,
Having vainly fear'd too little. Away with him!
We'll sift this matter further.
If you shall prove
This ring was ever hers, you shall as easy
Prove that I husbanded her bed in Florence,
Where yet she never was.
Exit, guarded
I am wrapp'd in dismal thinkings.
Enter a Gentleman
Gracious sovereign,
Whether I have been to blame or no, I know not:
Here's a petition from a Florentine,
Who hath for four or five removes come short
To tender it herself. I undertook it,
Vanquish'd thereto by the fair grace and speech
Of the poor suppliant, who by this I know
Is here attending: her business looks in her
With an importing visage
In a sweet verbal brief, it did concern
Your highness with herself.
[Reads]  Upon his many protestations to marry me
when his wife was dead, I blush to say it, he won
me. Now is the Count Rousillon a widower: his vows
are forfeited to me, and my honour's paid to him. He
stole from Florence, taking no leave, and I follow
him to his country for justice: grant it me, O
king! in you it best lies
flourishes, and a poor maid is undone.
DIANA CAPILET.
I will buy me a son-in-law in a fair, and toll for
this: I'll none of him.
The heavens have thought well on thee Lafeu,
To bring forth this discovery. Seek these suitors:
Go speedily and bring again the count.
I am afeard the life of Helen, lady,
Was foully snatch'd.
Now, justice on the doers!
Re-enter BERTRAM, guarded
I wonder, sir, sith wives are monsters to you,
And that you fly them as you swear them lordship,
Yet you desire to marry.
Enter Widow and DIANA
What woman's that?
I am, my lord, a wretched Florentine,
Derived from the ancient Capilet:
My suit, as I do understand, you know,
And therefore know how far I may be pitied.
I am her mother, sir, whose age and honour
Both suffer under this complaint we bring,
And both shall cease, without your remedy.
Come hither, count
My lord, I neither can nor will deny
But that I know them: do they charge me further?
Why do you look so strange upon your wife?
She's none of mine, my lord.
If you shall marry,
You give away this hand, and that is mine
You give away heaven's vows, and those are mine
You give away myself, which is known mine
For I by vow am so embodied yours,
That she which marries you must marry me,
Either both or none.
Your reputation comes too short for my daughter
are no husband for her.
My lord, this is a fond and desperate creature,
Whom sometime I have laugh'd with: let your highness
Lay a more noble thought upon mine honour
Than for to think that I would sink it here.
Sir, for my thoughts, you have them ill to friend
Till your deeds gain them: fairer prove your honour
Than in my thought it lies.
Good my lord,
Ask him upon his oath, if he does think
He had not my virginity.
What say'st thou to her?
She's impudent, my lord,
And was a common gamester to the camp.
He does me wrong, my lord
He might have bought me at a common price:
Do not believe him. O, behold this ring,
Whose high respect and rich validity
Did lack a parallel
He gave it to a commoner o' the camp,
If I be one.
He blushes, and 'tis it:
Of six preceding ancestors, that gem,
Conferr'd by testament to the sequent issue,
Hath it been owed and worn. This is his wife
That ring's a thousand proofs.
Methought you said
You saw one here in court could witness it.
I did, my lord, but loath am to produce
So bad an instrument: his name's Parolles.
I saw the man to-day, if man he be.
Find him, and bring him hither.
Exit an Attendant
What of him?
He's quoted for a most perfidious slave,
With all the spots o' the world tax'd and debosh'd
Whose nature sickens but to speak a truth.
Am I or that or this for what he'll utter,
That will speak any thing?
She hath that ring of yours.
I think she has: certain it is I liked her,
And boarded her i' the wanton way of youth:
She knew her distance and did angle for me,
Madding my eagerness with her restraint,
As all impediments in fancy's course
Are motives of more fancy
Her infinite cunning, with her modern grace,
Subdued me to her rate: she got the ring
And I had that which any inferior might
At market-price have bought.
I must be patient:
You, that have turn'd off a first so noble wife,
May justly diet me. I pray you yet
Since you lack virtue, I will lose a husband
Send for your ring, I will return it home,
And give me mine again.
I have it not.
What ring was yours, I pray you?
Sir, much like
The same upon your finger.
Know you this ring? this ring was his of late.
And this was it I gave him, being abed.
The story then goes false, you threw it him
Out of a casement.
I have spoke the truth.
Enter PAROLLES
My lord, I do confess the ring was hers.
You boggle shrewdly, every feather stars you.
Is this the man you speak of?
Ay, my lord.
Tell me, sirrah, but tell me true, I charge you,
Not fearing the displeasure of your master,
Which on your just proceeding I'll keep off,
By him and by this woman here what know you?
So please your majesty, my master hath been an
honourable gentleman: tricks he hath had in him,
which gentlemen have.
Come, come, to the purpose: did he love this woman?
Faith, sir, he did love her
How, I pray you?
He did love her, sir, as a gentleman loves a woman.
How is that?
He loved her, sir, and loved her not.
As thou art a knave, and no knave. What an
equivocal companion is this!
I am a poor man, and at your majesty's command.
He's a good drum, my lord, but a naughty orator.
Do you know he promised me marriage?
Faith, I know more than I'll speak.
But wilt thou not speak all thou knowest?
Yes, so please your majesty. I did go between them,
as I said
indeed he was mad for her, and talked of Satan and
of Limbo and of Furies and I know not what: yet I
was in that credit with them at that time that I
knew of their going to bed, and of other motions,
as promising her marriage, and things which would
derive me ill will to speak of
speak what I know.
Thou hast spoken all already, unless thou canst say
they are married: but thou art too fine in thy
evidence
This ring, you say, was yours?
Ay, my good lord.
Where did you buy it? or who gave it you?
It was not given me, nor I did not buy it.
Who lent it you?
It was not lent me neither.
Where did you find it, then?
I found it not.
If it were yours by none of all these ways,
How could you give it him?
I never gave it him.
This woman's an easy glove, my lord
and on at pleasure.
This ring was mine
It might be yours or hers, for aught I know.
Take her away
To prison with her: and away with him.
Unless thou tell'st me where thou hadst this ring,
Thou diest within this hour.
I'll never tell you.
Take her away.
I'll put in bail, my liege.
I think thee now some common customer.
By Jove, if ever I knew man, 'twas you.
Wherefore hast thou accused him all this while?
Because he's guilty, and he is not guilty:
He knows I am no maid, and he'll swear to't
I'll swear I am a maid, and he knows not.
Great king, I am no strumpet, by my life
I am either maid, or else this old man's wife.
She does abuse our ears: to prison with her.
Good mother, fetch my bail. Stay, royal sir:
Exit Widow
The jeweller that owes the ring is sent for,
And he shall surety me. But for this lord,
Who hath abused me, as he knows himself,
Though yet he never harm'd me, here I quit him:
He knows himself my bed he hath defiled
And at that time he got his wife with child:
Dead though she be, she feels her young one kick:
So there's my riddle: one that's dead is quick:
And now behold the meaning.
Re-enter Widow, with HELENA
Is there no exorcist
Beguiles the truer office of mine eyes?
Is't real that I see?
No, my good lord
'Tis but the shadow of a wife you see,
The name and not the thing.
Both, both. O, pardon!
O my good lord, when I was like this maid,
I found you wondrous kind. There is your ring
And, look you, here's your letter
'When from my finger you can get this ring
And are by me with child,'  and c. This is done:
Will you be mine, now you are doubly won?
If she, my liege, can make me know this clearly,
I'll love her dearly, ever, ever dearly.
If it appear not plain and prove untrue,
Deadly divorce step between me and you!
O my dear mother, do I see you living?
Mine eyes smell onions
To PAROLLES
Good Tom Drum, lend me a handkercher: so,
I thank thee: wait on me home, I'll make sport with thee:
Let thy courtesies alone, they are scurvy ones.
Let us from point to point this story know,
To make the even truth in pleasure flow.
To DIANA
If thou be'st yet a fresh uncropped flower,
Choose thou thy husband, and I'll pay thy dower
For I can guess that by thy honest aid
Thou keep'st a wife herself, thyself a maid.
Of that and all the progress, more or less,
Resolvedly more leisure shall express:
All yet seems well
The bitter past, more welcome is the sweet.
Flourish
EPILOGUE
The king's a beggar, now the play is done:
All is well ended, if this suit be won,
That you express content
With strife to please you, day exceeding day:
Ours be your patience then, and yours our parts
Your gentle hands lend us, and take our hearts.
Exeunt
ACT I
SCENE I. Orchard of Oliver's house.
Enter ORLANDO and ADAM
As I remember, Adam, it was upon this fashion
bequeathed me by will but poor a thousand crowns,
and, as thou sayest, charged my brother, on his
blessing, to breed me well: and there begins my
sadness. My brother Jaques he keeps at school, and
report speaks goldenly of his profit: for my part,
he keeps me rustically at home, or, to speak more
properly, stays me here at home unkept
that keeping for a gentleman of my birth, that
differs not from the stalling of an ox? His horses
are bred better
with their feeding, they are taught their manage,
and to that end riders dearly hired: but I, his
brother, gain nothing under him but growth
which his animals on his dunghills are as much
bound to him as I. Besides this nothing that he so
plentifully gives me, the something that nature gave
me his countenance seems to take from me: he lets
me feed with his hinds, bars me the place of a
brother, and, as much as in him lies, mines my
gentility with my education. This is it, Adam, that
grieves me
think is within me, begins to mutiny against this
servitude: I will no longer endure it, though yet I
know no wise remedy how to avoid it.
Yonder comes my master, your brother.
Go apart, Adam, and thou shalt hear how he will
shake me up.
Enter OLIVER
Now, sir! what make you here?
Nothing: I am not taught to make any thing.
What mar you then, sir?
Marry, sir, I am helping you to mar that which God
made, a poor unworthy brother of yours, with idleness.
Marry, sir, be better employed, and be naught awhile.
Shall I keep your hogs and eat husks with them?
What prodigal portion have I spent, that I should
come to such penury?
Know you where your are, sir?
O, sir, very well
Know you before whom, sir?
Ay, better than him I am before knows me. I know
you are my eldest brother
condition of blood, you should so know me. The
courtesy of nations allows you my better, in that
you are the first-born
takes not away my blood, were there twenty brothers
betwixt us: I have as much of my father in me as
you
nearer to his reverence.
What, boy!
Come, come, elder brother, you are too young in this.
Wilt thou lay hands on me, villain?
I am no villain
Rowland de Boys
a villain that says such a father begot villains.
Wert thou not my brother, I would not take this hand
from thy throat till this other had pulled out thy
tongue for saying so: thou hast railed on thyself.
Sweet masters, be patient: for your father's
remembrance, be at accord.
Let me go, I say.
I will not, till I please: you shall hear me. My
father charged you in his will to give me good
education: you have trained me like a peasant,
obscuring and hiding from me all gentleman-like
qualities. The spirit of my father grows strong in
me, and I will no longer endure it: therefore allow
me such exercises as may become a gentleman, or
give me the poor allottery my father left me by
testament
And what wilt thou do? beg, when that is spent?
Well, sir, get you in: I will not long be troubled
with you
pray you, leave me.
I will no further offend you than becomes me for my good.
Get you with him, you old dog.
Is 'old dog' my reward? Most true, I have lost my
teeth in your service. God be with my old master!
he would not have spoke such a word.
Exeunt ORLANDO and ADAM
Is it even so? begin you to grow upon me? I will
physic your rankness, and yet give no thousand
crowns neither. Holla, Dennis!
Enter DENNIS
Calls your worship?
Was not Charles, the duke's wrestler, here to speak with me?
So please you, he is here at the door and importunes
access to you.
Call him in.
Exit DENNIS
'Twill be a good way
Enter CHARLES
Good morrow to your worship.
Good Monsieur Charles, what's the new news at the
new court?
There's no news at the court, sir, but the old news:
that is, the old duke is banished by his younger
brother the new duke
have put themselves into voluntary exile with him,
whose lands and revenues enrich the new duke
therefore he gives them good leave to wander.
Can you tell if Rosalind, the duke's daughter, be
banished with her father?
O, no
her, being ever from their cradles bred together,
that she would have followed her exile, or have died
to stay behind her. She is at the court, and no
less beloved of her uncle than his own daughter
never two ladies loved as they do.
Where will the old duke live?
They say he is already in the forest of Arden, and
a many merry men with him
the old Robin Hood of England: they say many young
gentlemen flock to him every day, and fleet the time
carelessly, as they did in the golden world.
What, you wrestle to-morrow before the new duke?
Marry, do I, sir
matter. I am given, sir, secretly to understand
that your younger brother Orlando hath a disposition
to come in disguised against me to try a fall.
To-morrow, sir, I wrestle for my credit
escapes me without some broken limb shall acquit him
well. Your brother is but young and tender
for your love, I would be loath to foil him, as I
must, for my own honour, if he come in: therefore,
out of my love to you, I came hither to acquaint you
withal, that either you might stay him from his
intendment or brook such disgrace well as he shall
run into, in that it is a thing of his own search
and altogether against my will.
Charles, I thank thee for thy love to me, which
thou shalt find I will most kindly requite. I had
myself notice of my brother's purpose herein and
have by underhand means laboured to dissuade him from
it, but he is resolute. I'll tell thee, Charles:
it is the stubbornest young fellow of France, full
of ambition, an envious emulator of every man's
good parts, a secret and villanous contriver against
me his natural brother: therefore use thy
discretion
as his finger. And thou wert best look to't
thou dost him any slight disgrace or if he do not
mightily grace himself on thee, he will practise
against thee by poison, entrap thee by some
treacherous device and never leave thee till he
hath ta'en thy life by some indirect means or other
for, I assure thee, and almost with tears I speak
it, there is not one so young and so villanous this
day living. I speak but brotherly of him
should I anatomize him to thee as he is, I must
blush and weep and thou must look pale and wonder.
I am heartily glad I came hither to you. If he come
to-morrow, I'll give him his payment: if ever he go
alone again, I'll never wrestle for prize more: and
so God keep your worship!
Farewell, good Charles.
Exit CHARLES
Now will I stir this gamester: I hope I shall see
an end of him
hates nothing more than he. Yet he's gentle, never
schooled and yet learned, full of noble device, of
all sorts enchantingly beloved, and indeed so much
in the heart of the world, and especially of my own
people, who best know him, that I am altogether
misprised: but it shall not be so long
wrestler shall clear all: nothing remains but that
I kindle the boy thither
Exit
SCENE II. Lawn before the Duke's palace.
Enter CELIA and ROSALIND
I pray thee, Rosalind, sweet my coz, be merry.
Dear Celia, I show more mirth than I am mistress of
and would you yet I were merrier? Unless you could
teach me to forget a banished father, you must not
learn me how to remember any extraordinary pleasure.
Herein I see thou lovest me not with the full weight
that I love thee. If my uncle, thy banished father,
had banished thy uncle, the duke my father, so thou
hadst been still with me, I could have taught my
love to take thy father for mine: so wouldst thou,
if the truth of thy love to me were so righteously
tempered as mine is to thee.
Well, I will forget the condition of my estate, to
rejoice in yours.
You know my father hath no child but I, nor none is
like to have: and, truly, when he dies, thou shalt
be his heir, for what he hath taken away from thy
father perforce, I will render thee again in
affection
that oath, let me turn monster: therefore, my
sweet Rose, my dear Rose, be merry.
From henceforth I will, coz, and devise sports. Let
me see
Marry, I prithee, do, to make sport withal: but
love no man in good earnest
neither than with safety of a pure blush thou mayst
in honour come off again.
What shall be our sport, then?
Let us sit and mock the good housewife Fortune from
her wheel, that her gifts may henceforth be bestowed equally.
I would we could do so, for her benefits are
mightily misplaced, and the bountiful blind woman
doth most mistake in her gifts to women.
'Tis true
makes honest, and those that she makes honest she
makes very ill-favouredly.
Nay, now thou goest from Fortune's office to
Nature's: Fortune reigns in gifts of the world,
not in the lineaments of Nature.
Enter TOUCHSTONE
No? when Nature hath made a fair creature, may she
not by Fortune fall into the fire? Though Nature
hath given us wit to flout at Fortune, hath not
Fortune sent in this fool to cut off the argument?
Indeed, there is Fortune too hard for Nature, when
Fortune makes Nature's natural the cutter-off of
Nature's wit.
Peradventure this is not Fortune's work neither, but
Nature's
to reason of such goddesses and hath sent this
natural for our whetstone
the fool is the whetstone of the wits. How now,
wit! whither wander you?
Mistress, you must come away to your father.
Were you made the messenger?
No, by mine honour, but I was bid to come for you.
Where learned you that oath, fool?
Of a certain knight that swore by his honour they
were good pancakes and swore by his honour the
mustard was naught: now I'll stand to it, the
pancakes were naught and the mustard was good, and
yet was not the knight forsworn.
How prove you that, in the great heap of your
knowledge?
Ay, marry, now unmuzzle your wisdom.
Stand you both forth now: stroke your chins, and
swear by your beards that I am a knave.
By our beards, if we had them, thou art.
By my knavery, if I had it, then I were
swear by that that is not, you are not forsworn: no
more was this knight swearing by his honour, for he
never had any
before ever he saw those pancakes or that mustard.
Prithee, who is't that thou meanest?
One that old Frederick, your father, loves.
My father's love is enough to honour him: enough!
speak no more of him
one of these days.
The more pity, that fools may not speak wisely what
wise men do foolishly.
By my troth, thou sayest true
wit that fools have was silenced, the little foolery
that wise men have makes a great show. Here comes
Monsieur Le Beau.
With his mouth full of news.
Which he will put on us, as pigeons feed their young.
Then shall we be news-crammed.
All the better
Enter LE BEAU
Bon jour, Monsieur Le Beau: what's the news?
Fair princess, you have lost much good sport.
Sport! of what colour?
What colour, madam! how shall I answer you?
As wit and fortune will.
Or as the Destinies decree.
Well said: that was laid on with a trowel.
Nay, if I keep not my rank,--
Thou losest thy old smell.
You amaze me, ladies: I would have told you of good
wrestling, which you have lost the sight of.
You tell us the manner of the wrestling.
I will tell you the beginning
your ladyships, you may see the end
yet to do
to perform it.
Well, the beginning, that is dead and buried.
There comes an old man and his three sons,--
I could match this beginning with an old tale.
Three proper young men, of excellent growth and presence.
With bills on their necks, 'Be it known unto all men
by these presents.'
The eldest of the three wrestled with Charles, the
duke's wrestler
and broke three of his ribs, that there is little
hope of life in him: so he served the second, and
so the third. Yonder they lie
their father, making such pitiful dole over them
that all the beholders take his part with weeping.
Alas!
But what is the sport, monsieur, that the ladies
have lost?
Why, this that I speak of.
Thus men may grow wiser every day: it is the first
time that ever I heard breaking of ribs was sport
for ladies.
Or I, I promise thee.
But is there any else longs to see this broken music
in his sides? is there yet another dotes upon
rib-breaking? Shall we see this wrestling, cousin?
You must, if you stay here
appointed for the wrestling, and they are ready to
perform it.
Yonder, sure, they are coming: let us now stay and see it.
Flourish. Enter DUKE FREDERICK, Lords, ORLANDO, CHARLES, and Attendants
Come on: since the youth will not be entreated, his
own peril on his forwardness.
Is yonder the man?
Even he, madam.
Alas, he is too young! yet he looks successfully.
How now, daughter and cousin! are you crept hither
to see the wrestling?
Ay, my liege, so please you give us leave.
You will take little delight in it, I can tell you
there is such odds in the man. In pity of the
challenger's youth I would fain dissuade him, but he
will not be entreated. Speak to him, ladies
you can move him.
Call him hither, good Monsieur Le Beau.
Do so: I'll not be by.
Monsieur the challenger, the princesses call for you.
I attend them with all respect and duty.
Young man, have you challenged Charles the wrestler?
No, fair princess
come but in, as others do, to try with him the
strength of my youth.
Young gentleman, your spirits are too bold for your
years. You have seen cruel proof of this man's
strength: if you saw yourself with your eyes or
knew yourself with your judgment, the fear of your
adventure would counsel you to a more equal
enterprise. We pray you, for your own sake, to
embrace your own safety and give over this attempt.
Do, young sir
be misprised: we will make it our suit to the duke
that the wrestling might not go forward.
I beseech you, punish me not with your hard
thoughts
so fair and excellent ladies any thing. But let
your fair eyes and gentle wishes go with me to my
trial: wherein if I be foiled, there is but one
shamed that was never gracious
dead that was willing to be so: I shall do my
friends no wrong, for I have none to lament me, the
world no injury, for in it I have nothing
the world I fill up a place, which may be better
supplied when I have made it empty.
The little strength that I have, I would it were with you.
And mine, to eke out hers.
Fare you well: pray heaven I be deceived in you!
Your heart's desires be with you!
Come, where is this young gallant that is so
desirous to lie with his mother earth?
Ready, sir
You shall try but one fall.
No, I warrant your grace, you shall not entreat him
to a second, that have so mightily persuaded him
from a first.
An you mean to mock me after, you should not have
mocked me before: but come your ways.
Now Hercules be thy speed, young man!
I would I were invisible, to catch the strong
fellow by the leg.
They wrestle
O excellent young man!
If I had a thunderbolt in mine eye, I can tell who
should down.
Shout. CHARLES is thrown
No more, no more.
Yes, I beseech your grace: I am not yet well breathed.
How dost thou, Charles?
He cannot speak, my lord.
Bear him away. What is thy name, young man?
Orlando, my liege
I would thou hadst been son to some man else:
The world esteem'd thy father honourable,
But I did find him still mine enemy:
Thou shouldst have better pleased me with this deed,
Hadst thou descended from another house.
But fare thee well
I would thou hadst told me of another father.
Exeunt DUKE FREDERICK, train, and LE BEAU
Were I my father, coz, would I do this?
I am more proud to be Sir Rowland's son,
His youngest son
To be adopted heir to Frederick.
My father loved Sir Rowland as his soul,
And all the world was of my father's mind:
Had I before known this young man his son,
I should have given him tears unto entreaties,
Ere he should thus have ventured.
Gentle cousin,
Let us go thank him and encourage him:
My father's rough and envious disposition
Sticks me at heart. Sir, you have well deserved:
If you do keep your promises in love
But justly, as you have exceeded all promise,
Your mistress shall be happy.
Gentleman,
Giving him a chain from her neck
Wear this for me, one out of suits with fortune,
That could give more, but that her hand lacks means.
Shall we go, coz?
Ay. Fare you well, fair gentleman.
Can I not say, I thank you? My better parts
Are all thrown down, and that which here stands up
Is but a quintain, a mere lifeless block.
He calls us back: my pride fell with my fortunes
I'll ask him what he would. Did you call, sir?
Sir, you have wrestled well and overthrown
More than your enemies.
Will you go, coz?
Have with you. Fare you well.
Exeunt ROSALIND and CELIA
What passion hangs these weights upon my tongue?
I cannot speak to her, yet she urged conference.
O poor Orlando, thou art overthrown!
Or Charles or something weaker masters thee.
Re-enter LE BEAU
Good sir, I do in friendship counsel you
To leave this place. Albeit you have deserved
High commendation, true applause and love,
Yet such is now the duke's condition
That he misconstrues all that you have done.
The duke is humorous
More suits you to conceive than I to speak of.
I thank you, sir: and, pray you, tell me this:
Which of the two was daughter of the duke
That here was at the wrestling?
Neither his daughter, if we judge by manners
But yet indeed the lesser is his daughter
The other is daughter to the banish'd duke,
And here detain'd by her usurping uncle,
To keep his daughter company
Are dearer than the natural bond of sisters.
But I can tell you that of late this duke
Hath ta'en displeasure 'gainst his gentle niece,
Grounded upon no other argument
But that the people praise her for her virtues
And pity her for her good father's sake
And, on my life, his malice 'gainst the lady
Will suddenly break forth. Sir, fare you well:
Hereafter, in a better world than this,
I shall desire more love and knowledge of you.
I rest much bounden to you: fare you well.
Exit LE BEAU
Thus must I from the smoke into the smother
From tyrant duke unto a tyrant brother:
But heavenly Rosalind!
Exit
SCENE III. A room in the palace.
Enter CELIA and ROSALIND
Why, cousin! why, Rosalind! Cupid have mercy! not a word?
Not one to throw at a dog.
No, thy words are too precious to be cast away upon
curs
Then there were two cousins laid up
should be lamed with reasons and the other mad
without any.
But is all this for your father?
No, some of it is for my child's father. O, how
full of briers is this working-day world!
They are but burs, cousin, thrown upon thee in
holiday foolery: if we walk not in the trodden
paths our very petticoats will catch them.
I could shake them off my coat: these burs are in my heart.
Hem them away.
I would try, if I could cry 'hem' and have him.
Come, come, wrestle with thy affections.
O, they take the part of a better wrestler than myself!
O, a good wish upon you! you will try in time, in
despite of a fall. But, turning these jests out of
service, let us talk in good earnest: is it
possible, on such a sudden, you should fall into so
strong a liking with old Sir Rowland's youngest son?
The duke my father loved his father dearly.
Doth it therefore ensue that you should love his son
dearly? By this kind of chase, I should hate him,
for my father hated his father dearly
not Orlando.
No, faith, hate him not, for my sake.
Why should I not? doth he not deserve well?
Let me love him for that, and do you love him
because I do. Look, here comes the duke.
With his eyes full of anger.
Enter DUKE FREDERICK, with Lords
Mistress, dispatch you with your safest haste
And get you from our court.
Me, uncle?
You, cousin
Within these ten days if that thou be'st found
So near our public court as twenty miles,
Thou diest for it.
I do beseech your grace,
Let me the knowledge of my fault bear with me:
If with myself I hold intelligence
Or have acquaintance with mine own desires,
If that I do not dream or be not frantic,--
As I do trust I am not--then, dear uncle,
Never so much as in a thought unborn
Did I offend your highness.
Thus do all traitors:
If their purgation did consist in words,
They are as innocent as grace itself:
Let it suffice thee that I trust thee not.
Yet your mistrust cannot make me a traitor:
Tell me whereon the likelihood depends.
Thou art thy father's daughter
So was I when your highness took his dukedom
So was I when your highness banish'd him:
Treason is not inherited, my lord
Or, if we did derive it from our friends,
What's that to me? my father was no traitor:
Then, good my liege, mistake me not so much
To think my poverty is treacherous.
Dear sovereign, hear me speak.
Ay, Celia
Else had she with her father ranged along.
I did not then entreat to have her stay
It was your pleasure and your own remorse:
I was too young that time to value her
But now I know her: if she be a traitor,
Why so am I
Rose at an instant, learn'd, play'd, eat together,
And wheresoever we went, like Juno's swans,
Still we went coupled and inseparable.
She is too subtle for thee
Her very silence and her patience
Speak to the people, and they pity her.
Thou art a fool: she robs thee of thy name
And thou wilt show more bright and seem more virtuous
When she is gone. Then open not thy lips:
Firm and irrevocable is my doom
Which I have pass'd upon her
Pronounce that sentence then on me, my liege:
I cannot live out of her company.
You are a fool. You, niece, provide yourself:
If you outstay the time, upon mine honour,
And in the greatness of my word, you die.
Exeunt DUKE FREDERICK and Lords
O my poor Rosalind, whither wilt thou go?
Wilt thou change fathers? I will give thee mine.
I charge thee, be not thou more grieved than I am.
I have more cause.
Thou hast not, cousin
Prithee be cheerful: know'st thou not, the duke
Hath banish'd me, his daughter?
That he hath not.
No, hath not? Rosalind lacks then the love
Which teacheth thee that thou and I am one:
Shall we be sunder'd? shall we part, sweet girl?
No: let my father seek another heir.
Therefore devise with me how we may fly,
Whither to go and what to bear with us
And do not seek to take your change upon you,
To bear your griefs yourself and leave me out
For, by this heaven, now at our sorrows pale,
Say what thou canst, I'll go along with thee.
Why, whither shall we go?
To seek my uncle in the forest of Arden.
Alas, what danger will it be to us,
Maids as we are, to travel forth so far!
Beauty provoketh thieves sooner than gold.
I'll put myself in poor and mean attire
And with a kind of umber smirch my face
The like do you: so shall we pass along
And never stir assailants.
Were it not better,
Because that I am more than common tall,
That I did suit me all points like a man?
A gallant curtle-axe upon my thigh,
A boar-spear in my hand
Lie there what hidden woman's fear there will--
We'll have a swashing and a martial outside,
As many other mannish cowards have
That do outface it with their semblances.
What shall I call thee when thou art a man?
I'll have no worse a name than Jove's own page
And therefore look you call me Ganymede.
But what will you be call'd?
Something that hath a reference to my state
No longer Celia, but Aliena.
But, cousin, what if we assay'd to steal
The clownish fool out of your father's court?
Would he not be a comfort to our travel?
He'll go along o'er the wide world with me
Leave me alone to woo him. Let's away,
And get our jewels and our wealth together,
Devise the fittest time and safest way
To hide us from pursuit that will be made
After my flight. Now go we in content
To liberty and not to banishment.
Exeunt
ACT II
SCENE I. The Forest of Arden.
Enter DUKE SENIOR, AMIENS, and two or three Lords, like foresters
Now, my co-mates and brothers in exile,
Hath not old custom made this life more sweet
Than that of painted pomp? Are not these woods
More free from peril than the envious court?
Here feel we but the penalty of Adam,
The seasons' difference, as the icy fang
And churlish chiding of the winter's wind,
Which, when it bites and blows upon my body,
Even till I shrink with cold, I smile and say
'This is no flattery: these are counsellors
That feelingly persuade me what I am.'
Sweet are the uses of adversity,
Which, like the toad, ugly and venomous,
Wears yet a precious jewel in his head
And this our life exempt from public haunt
Finds tongues in trees, books in the running brooks,
Sermons in stones and good in every thing.
I would not change it.
Happy is your grace,
That can translate the stubbornness of fortune
Into so quiet and so sweet a style.
Come, shall we go and kill us venison?
And yet it irks me the poor dappled fools,
Being native burghers of this desert city,
Should in their own confines with forked heads
Have their round haunches gored.
Indeed, my lord,
The melancholy Jaques grieves at that,
And, in that kind, swears you do more usurp
Than doth your brother that hath banish'd you.
To-day my Lord of Amiens and myself
Did steal behind him as he lay along
Under an oak whose antique root peeps out
Upon the brook that brawls along this wood:
To the which place a poor sequester'd stag,
That from the hunter's aim had ta'en a hurt,
Did come to languish, and indeed, my lord,
The wretched animal heaved forth such groans
That their discharge did stretch his leathern coat
Almost to bursting, and the big round tears
Coursed one another down his innocent nose
In piteous chase
Much marked of the melancholy Jaques,
Stood on the extremest verge of the swift brook,
Augmenting it with tears.
But what said Jaques?
Did he not moralize this spectacle?
O, yes, into a thousand similes.
First, for his weeping into the needless stream
'Poor deer,' quoth he, 'thou makest a testament
As worldlings do, giving thy sum of more
To that which had too much:' then, being there alone,
Left and abandon'd of his velvet friends,
''Tis right:' quoth he
The flux of company:' anon a careless herd,
Full of the pasture, jumps along by him
And never stays to greet him
'Sweep on, you fat and greasy citizens
'Tis just the fashion: wherefore do you look
Upon that poor and broken bankrupt there?'
Thus most invectively he pierceth through
The body of the country, city, court,
Yea, and of this our life, swearing that we
Are mere usurpers, tyrants and what's worse,
To fright the animals and to kill them up
In their assign'd and native dwelling-place.
And did you leave him in this contemplation?
We did, my lord, weeping and commenting
Upon the sobbing deer.
Show me the place:
I love to cope him in these sullen fits,
For then he's full of matter.
I'll bring you to him straight.
Exeunt
SCENE II. A room in the palace.
Enter DUKE FREDERICK, with Lords
Can it be possible that no man saw them?
It cannot be: some villains of my court
Are of consent and sufferance in this.
I cannot hear of any that did see her.
The ladies, her attendants of her chamber,
Saw her abed, and in the morning early
They found the bed untreasured of their mistress.
My lord, the roynish clown, at whom so oft
Your grace was wont to laugh, is also missing.
Hisperia, the princess' gentlewoman,
Confesses that she secretly o'erheard
Your daughter and her cousin much commend
The parts and graces of the wrestler
That did but lately foil the sinewy Charles
And she believes, wherever they are gone,
That youth is surely in their company.
Send to his brother
If he be absent, bring his brother to me
I'll make him find him: do this suddenly,
And let not search and inquisition quail
To bring again these foolish runaways.
Exeunt
SCENE III. Before OLIVER'S house.
Enter ORLANDO and ADAM, meeting
Who's there?
What, my young master? O, my gentle master!
O my sweet master! O you memory
Of old Sir Rowland! why, what make you here?
Why are you virtuous? why do people love you?
And wherefore are you gentle, strong and valiant?
Why would you be so fond to overcome
The bonny priser of the humorous duke?
Your praise is come too swiftly home before you.
Know you not, master, to some kind of men
Their graces serve them but as enemies?
No more do yours: your virtues, gentle master,
Are sanctified and holy traitors to you.
O, what a world is this, when what is comely
Envenoms him that bears it!
Why, what's the matter?
O unhappy youth!
Come not within these doors
The enemy of all your graces lives:
Your brother--no, no brother
Yet not the son, I will not call him son
Of him I was about to call his father--
Hath heard your praises, and this night he means
To burn the lodging where you use to lie
And you within it: if he fail of that,
He will have other means to cut you off.
I overheard him and his practises.
This is no place
Abhor it, fear it, do not enter it.
Why, whither, Adam, wouldst thou have me go?
No matter whither, so you come not here.
What, wouldst thou have me go and beg my food?
Or with a base and boisterous sword enforce
A thievish living on the common road?
This I must do, or know not what to do:
Yet this I will not do, do how I can
I rather will subject me to the malice
Of a diverted blood and bloody brother.
But do not so. I have five hundred crowns,
The thrifty hire I saved under your father,
Which I did store to be my foster-nurse
When service should in my old limbs lie lame
And unregarded age in corners thrown:
Take that, and He that doth the ravens feed,
Yea, providently caters for the sparrow,
Be comfort to my age! Here is the gold
And all this I give you. Let me be your servant:
Though I look old, yet I am strong and lusty
For in my youth I never did apply
Hot and rebellious liquors in my blood,
Nor did not with unbashful forehead woo
The means of weakness and debility
Therefore my age is as a lusty winter,
Frosty, but kindly: let me go with you
I'll do the service of a younger man
In all your business and necessities.
O good old man, how well in thee appears
The constant service of the antique world,
When service sweat for duty, not for meed!
Thou art not for the fashion of these times,
Where none will sweat but for promotion,
And having that, do choke their service up
Even with the having: it is not so with thee.
But, poor old man, thou prunest a rotten tree,
That cannot so much as a blossom yield
In lieu of all thy pains and husbandry
But come thy ways
And ere we have thy youthful wages spent,
We'll light upon some settled low content.
Master, go on, and I will follow thee,
To the last gasp, with truth and loyalty.
From seventeen years till now almost fourscore
Here lived I, but now live here no more.
At seventeen years many their fortunes seek
But at fourscore it is too late a week:
Yet fortune cannot recompense me better
Than to die well and not my master's debtor.
Exeunt
SCENE IV. The Forest of Arden.
Enter ROSALIND for Ganymede, CELIA for Aliena, and TOUCHSTONE
O Jupiter, how weary are my spirits!
I care not for my spirits, if my legs were not weary.
I could find in my heart to disgrace my man's
apparel and to cry like a woman
the weaker vessel, as doublet and hose ought to show
itself courageous to petticoat: therefore courage,
good Aliena!
I pray you, bear with me
For my part, I had rather bear with you than bear
you
for I think you have no money in your purse.
Well, this is the forest of Arden.
Ay, now am I in Arden
at home, I was in a better place: but travellers
must be content.
Ay, be so, good Touchstone.
Enter CORIN and SILVIUS
Look you, who comes here
solemn talk.
That is the way to make her scorn you still.
O Corin, that thou knew'st how I do love her!
I partly guess
No, Corin, being old, thou canst not guess,
Though in thy youth thou wast as true a lover
As ever sigh'd upon a midnight pillow:
But if thy love were ever like to mine--
As sure I think did never man love so--
How many actions most ridiculous
Hast thou been drawn to by thy fantasy?
Into a thousand that I have forgotten.
O, thou didst then ne'er love so heartily!
If thou remember'st not the slightest folly
That ever love did make thee run into,
Thou hast not loved:
Or if thou hast not sat as I do now,
Wearying thy hearer in thy mistress' praise,
Thou hast not loved:
Or if thou hast not broke from company
Abruptly, as my passion now makes me,
Thou hast not loved.
O Phebe, Phebe, Phebe!
Exit
Alas, poor shepherd! searching of thy wound,
I have by hard adventure found mine own.
And I mine. I remember, when I was in love I broke
my sword upon a stone and bid him take that for
coming a-night to Jane Smile
kissing of her batlet and the cow's dugs that her
pretty chopt hands had milked
wooing of a peascod instead of her, from whom I took
two cods and, giving her them again, said with
weeping tears 'Wear these for my sake.' We that are
true lovers run into strange capers
mortal in nature, so is all nature in love mortal in folly.
Thou speakest wiser than thou art ware of.
Nay, I shall ne'er be ware of mine own wit till I
break my shins against it.
Jove, Jove! this shepherd's passion
Is much upon my fashion.
And mine
I pray you, one of you question yond man
If he for gold will give us any food:
I faint almost to death.
Holla, you clown!
Peace, fool: he's not thy kinsman.
Who calls?
Your betters, sir.
Else are they very wretched.
Peace, I say. Good even to you, friend.
And to you, gentle sir, and to you all.
I prithee, shepherd, if that love or gold
Can in this desert place buy entertainment,
Bring us where we may rest ourselves and feed:
Here's a young maid with travel much oppress'd
And faints for succor.
Fair sir, I pity her
And wish, for her sake more than for mine own,
My fortunes were more able to relieve her
But I am shepherd to another man
And do not shear the fleeces that I graze:
My master is of churlish disposition
And little recks to find the way to heaven
By doing deeds of hospitality:
Besides, his cote, his flocks and bounds of feed
Are now on sale, and at our sheepcote now,
By reason of his absence, there is nothing
That you will feed on
And in my voice most welcome shall you be.
What is he that shall buy his flock and pasture?
That young swain that you saw here but erewhile,
That little cares for buying any thing.
I pray thee, if it stand with honesty,
Buy thou the cottage, pasture and the flock,
And thou shalt have to pay for it of us.
And we will mend thy wages. I like this place.
And willingly could waste my time in it.
Assuredly the thing is to be sold:
Go with me: if you like upon report
The soil, the profit and this kind of life,
I will your very faithful feeder be
And buy it with your gold right suddenly.
Exeunt
SCENE V. The Forest.
Enter AMIENS, JAQUES, and others
SONG.
Under the greenwood tree
Who loves to lie with me,
And turn his merry note
Unto the sweet bird's throat,
Come hither, come hither, come hither:
Here shall he see No enemy
But winter and rough weather.
More, more, I prithee, more.
It will make you melancholy, Monsieur Jaques.
I thank it. More, I prithee, more. I can suck
melancholy out of a song, as a weasel sucks eggs.
More, I prithee, more.
My voice is ragged: I know I cannot please you.
I do not desire you to please me
sing. Come, more
What you will, Monsieur Jaques.
Nay, I care not for their names
nothing. Will you sing?
More at your request than to please myself.
Well then, if ever I thank any man, I'll thank you
but that they call compliment is like the encounter
of two dog-apes, and when a man thanks me heartily,
methinks I have given him a penny and he renders me
the beggarly thanks. Come, sing
not, hold your tongues.
Well, I'll end the song. Sirs, cover the while
duke will drink under this tree. He hath been all
this day to look you.
And I have been all this day to avoid him. He is
too disputable for my company: I think of as many
matters as he, but I give heaven thanks and make no
boast of them. Come, warble, come.
SONG.
Who doth ambition shun
All together here
And loves to live i' the sun,
Seeking the food he eats
And pleased with what he gets,
Come hither, come hither, come hither:
Here shall he see No enemy
But winter and rough weather.
I'll give you a verse to this note that I made
yesterday in despite of my invention.
And I'll sing it.
Thus it goes:--
If it do come to pass
That any man turn ass,
Leaving his wealth and ease,
A stubborn will to please,
Ducdame, ducdame, ducdame:
Here shall he see
Gross fools as he,
An if he will come to me.
What's that 'ducdame'?
'Tis a Greek invocation, to call fools into a
circle. I'll go sleep, if I can
rail against all the first-born of Egypt.
And I'll go seek the duke: his banquet is prepared.
Exeunt severally
SCENE VI. The forest.
Enter ORLANDO and ADAM
Dear master, I can go no further. O, I die for food!
Here lie I down, and measure out my grave. Farewell,
kind master.
Why, how now, Adam! no greater heart in thee? Live
a little
If this uncouth forest yield any thing savage, I
will either be food for it or bring it for food to
thee. Thy conceit is nearer death than thy powers.
For my sake be comfortable
the arm's end: I will here be with thee presently
and if I bring thee not something to eat, I will
give thee leave to die: but if thou diest before I
come, thou art a mocker of my labour. Well said!
thou lookest cheerly, and I'll be with thee quickly.
Yet thou liest in the bleak air: come, I will bear
thee to some shelter
lack of a dinner, if there live any thing in this
desert. Cheerly, good Adam!
Exeunt
SCENE VII. The forest.
A table set out. Enter DUKE SENIOR, AMIENS, and Lords like outlaws
I think he be transform'd into a beast
For I can no where find him like a man.
My lord, he is but even now gone hence:
Here was he merry, hearing of a song.
If he, compact of jars, grow musical,
We shall have shortly discord in the spheres.
Go, seek him: tell him I would speak with him.
Enter JAQUES
He saves my labour by his own approach.
Why, how now, monsieur! what a life is this,
That your poor friends must woo your company?
What, you look merrily!
A fool, a fool! I met a fool i' the forest,
A motley fool
As I do live by food, I met a fool
Who laid him down and bask'd him in the sun,
And rail'd on Lady Fortune in good terms,
In good set terms and yet a motley fool.
'Good morrow, fool,' quoth I. 'No, sir,' quoth he,
'Call me not fool till heaven hath sent me fortune:'
And then he drew a dial from his poke,
And, looking on it with lack-lustre eye,
Says very wisely, 'It is ten o'clock:
Thus we may see,' quoth he, 'how the world wags:
'Tis but an hour ago since it was nine,
And after one hour more 'twill be eleven
And so, from hour to hour, we ripe and ripe,
And then, from hour to hour, we rot and rot
And thereby hangs a tale.' When I did hear
The motley fool thus moral on the time,
My lungs began to crow like chanticleer,
That fools should be so deep-contemplative,
And I did laugh sans intermission
An hour by his dial. O noble fool!
A worthy fool! Motley's the only wear.
What fool is this?
O worthy fool! One that hath been a courtier,
And says, if ladies be but young and fair,
They have the gift to know it: and in his brain,
Which is as dry as the remainder biscuit
After a voyage, he hath strange places cramm'd
With observation, the which he vents
In mangled forms. O that I were a fool!
I am ambitious for a motley coat.
Thou shalt have one.
It is my only suit
Provided that you weed your better judgments
Of all opinion that grows rank in them
That I am wise. I must have liberty
Withal, as large a charter as the wind,
To blow on whom I please
And they that are most galled with my folly,
They most must laugh. And why, sir, must they so?
The 'why' is plain as way to parish church:
He that a fool doth very wisely hit
Doth very foolishly, although he smart,
Not to seem senseless of the bob: if not,
The wise man's folly is anatomized
Even by the squandering glances of the fool.
Invest me in my motley
To speak my mind, and I will through and through
Cleanse the foul body of the infected world,
If they will patiently receive my medicine.
Fie on thee! I can tell what thou wouldst do.
What, for a counter, would I do but good?
Most mischievous foul sin, in chiding sin:
For thou thyself hast been a libertine,
As sensual as the brutish sting itself
And all the embossed sores and headed evils,
That thou with licence of free foot hast caught,
Wouldst thou disgorge into the general world.
Why, who cries out on pride,
That can therein tax any private party?
Doth it not flow as hugely as the sea,
Till that the weary very means do ebb?
What woman in the city do I name,
When that I say the city-woman bears
The cost of princes on unworthy shoulders?
Who can come in and say that I mean her,
When such a one as she such is her neighbour?
Or what is he of basest function
That says his bravery is not of my cost,
Thinking that I mean him, but therein suits
His folly to the mettle of my speech?
There then
My tongue hath wrong'd him: if it do him right,
Then he hath wrong'd himself
Why then my taxing like a wild-goose flies,
Unclaim'd of any man. But who comes here?
Enter ORLANDO, with his sword drawn
Forbear, and eat no more.
Why, I have eat none yet.
Nor shalt not, till necessity be served.
Of what kind should this cock come of?
Art thou thus bolden'd, man, by thy distress,
Or else a rude despiser of good manners,
That in civility thou seem'st so empty?
You touch'd my vein at first: the thorny point
Of bare distress hath ta'en from me the show
Of smooth civility: yet am I inland bred
And know some nurture. But forbear, I say:
He dies that touches any of this fruit
Till I and my affairs are answered.
An you will not be answered with reason, I must die.
What would you have? Your gentleness shall force
More than your force move us to gentleness.
I almost die for food
Sit down and feed, and welcome to our table.
Speak you so gently? Pardon me, I pray you:
I thought that all things had been savage here
And therefore put I on the countenance
Of stern commandment. But whate'er you are
That in this desert inaccessible,
Under the shade of melancholy boughs,
Lose and neglect the creeping hours of time
If ever you have look'd on better days,
If ever been where bells have knoll'd to church,
If ever sat at any good man's feast,
If ever from your eyelids wiped a tear
And know what 'tis to pity and be pitied,
Let gentleness my strong enforcement be:
In the which hope I blush, and hide my sword.
True is it that we have seen better days,
And have with holy bell been knoll'd to church
And sat at good men's feasts and wiped our eyes
Of drops that sacred pity hath engender'd:
And therefore sit you down in gentleness
And take upon command what help we have
That to your wanting may be minister'd.
Then but forbear your food a little while,
Whiles, like a doe, I go to find my fawn
And give it food. There is an old poor man,
Who after me hath many a weary step
Limp'd in pure love: till he be first sufficed,
Oppress'd with two weak evils, age and hunger,
I will not touch a bit.
Go find him out,
And we will nothing waste till you return.
I thank ye
Exit
Thou seest we are not all alone unhappy:
This wide and universal theatre
Presents more woeful pageants than the scene
Wherein we play in.
All the world's a stage,
And all the men and women merely players:
They have their exits and their entrances
And one man in his time plays many parts,
His acts being seven ages. At first the infant,
Mewling and puking in the nurse's arms.
And then the whining school-boy, with his satchel
And shining morning face, creeping like snail
Unwillingly to school. And then the lover,
Sighing like furnace, with a woeful ballad
Made to his mistress' eyebrow. Then a soldier,
Full of strange oaths and bearded like the pard,
Jealous in honour, sudden and quick in quarrel,
Seeking the bubble reputation
Even in the cannon's mouth. And then the justice,
In fair round belly with good capon lined,
With eyes severe and beard of formal cut,
Full of wise saws and modern instances
And so he plays his part. The sixth age shifts
Into the lean and slipper'd pantaloon,
With spectacles on nose and pouch on side,
His youthful hose, well saved, a world too wide
For his shrunk shank
Turning again toward childish treble, pipes
And whistles in his sound. Last scene of all,
That ends this strange eventful history,
Is second childishness and mere oblivion,
Sans teeth, sans eyes, sans taste, sans everything.
Re-enter ORLANDO, with ADAM
Welcome. Set down your venerable burthen,
And let him feed.
I thank you most for him.
So had you need:
I scarce can speak to thank you for myself.
Welcome
As yet, to question you about your fortunes.
Give us some music
SONG.
Blow, blow, thou winter wind.
Thou art not so unkind
As man's ingratitude
Thy tooth is not so keen,
Because thou art not seen,
Although thy breath be rude.
Heigh-ho! sing, heigh-ho! unto the green holly:
Most friendship is feigning, most loving mere folly:
Then, heigh-ho, the holly!
This life is most jolly.
Freeze, freeze, thou bitter sky,
That dost not bite so nigh
As benefits forgot:
Though thou the waters warp,
Thy sting is not so sharp
As friend remember'd not.
Heigh-ho! sing,  and c.
If that you were the good Sir Rowland's son,
As you have whisper'd faithfully you were,
And as mine eye doth his effigies witness
Most truly limn'd and living in your face,
Be truly welcome hither: I am the duke
That loved your father: the residue of your fortune,
Go to my cave and tell me. Good old man,
Thou art right welcome as thy master is.
Support him by the arm. Give me your hand,
And let me all your fortunes understand.
Exeunt
ACT III
SCENE I. A room in the palace.
Enter DUKE FREDERICK, Lords, and OLIVER
Not see him since? Sir, sir, that cannot be:
But were I not the better part made mercy,
I should not seek an absent argument
Of my revenge, thou present. But look to it:
Find out thy brother, wheresoe'er he is
Seek him with candle
Within this twelvemonth, or turn thou no more
To seek a living in our territory.
Thy lands and all things that thou dost call thine
Worth seizure do we seize into our hands,
Till thou canst quit thee by thy brothers mouth
Of what we think against thee.
O that your highness knew my heart in this!
I never loved my brother in my life.
More villain thou. Well, push him out of doors
And let my officers of such a nature
Make an extent upon his house and lands:
Do this expediently and turn him going.
Exeunt
SCENE II. The forest.
Enter ORLANDO, with a paper
Hang there, my verse, in witness of my love:
And thou, thrice-crowned queen of night, survey
With thy chaste eye, from thy pale sphere above,
Thy huntress' name that my full life doth sway.
O Rosalind! these trees shall be my books
And in their barks my thoughts I'll character
That every eye which in this forest looks
Shall see thy virtue witness'd every where.
Run, run, Orlando
The fair, the chaste and unexpressive she.
Exit
Enter CORIN and TOUCHSTONE
And how like you this shepherd's life, Master Touchstone?
Truly, shepherd, in respect of itself, it is a good
life, but in respect that it is a shepherd's life,
it is naught. In respect that it is solitary, I
like it very well
private, it is a very vile life. Now, in respect it
is in the fields, it pleaseth me well
respect it is not in the court, it is tedious. As
is it a spare life, look you, it fits my humour well
but as there is no more plenty in it, it goes much
against my stomach. Hast any philosophy in thee, shepherd?
No more but that I know the more one sickens the
worse at ease he is
means and content is without three good friends
that the property of rain is to wet and fire to
burn
great cause of the night is lack of the sun
he that hath learned no wit by nature nor art may
complain of good breeding or comes of a very dull kindred.
Such a one is a natural philosopher. Wast ever in
court, shepherd?
No, truly.
Then thou art damned.
Nay, I hope.
Truly, thou art damned like an ill-roasted egg, all
on one side.
For not being at court? Your reason.
Why, if thou never wast at court, thou never sawest
good manners
then thy manners must be wicked
sin, and sin is damnation. Thou art in a parlous
state, shepherd.
Not a whit, Touchstone: those that are good manners
at the court are as ridiculous in the country as the
behavior of the country is most mockable at the
court. You told me you salute not at the court, but
you kiss your hands: that courtesy would be
uncleanly, if courtiers were shepherds.
Instance, briefly
Why, we are still handling our ewes, and their
fells, you know, are greasy.
Why, do not your courtier's hands sweat? and is not
the grease of a mutton as wholesome as the sweat of
a man? Shallow, shallow. A better instance, I say
Besides, our hands are hard.
Your lips will feel them the sooner. Shallow again.
A more sounder instance, come.
And they are often tarred over with the surgery of
our sheep: and would you have us kiss tar? The
courtier's hands are perfumed with civet.
Most shallow man! thou worms-meat, in respect of a
good piece of flesh indeed! Learn of the wise, and
perpend: civet is of a baser birth than tar, the
very uncleanly flux of a cat. Mend the instance, shepherd.
You have too courtly a wit for me: I'll rest.
Wilt thou rest damned? God help thee, shallow man!
God make incision in thee! thou art raw.
Sir, I am a true labourer: I earn that I eat, get
that I wear, owe no man hate, envy no man's
happiness, glad of other men's good, content with my
harm, and the greatest of my pride is to see my ewes
graze and my lambs suck.
That is another simple sin in you, to bring the ewes
and the rams together and to offer to get your
living by the copulation of cattle
bell-wether, and to betray a she-lamb of a
twelvemonth to a crooked-pated, old, cuckoldly ram,
out of all reasonable match. If thou beest not
damned for this, the devil himself will have no
shepherds
'scape.
Here comes young Master Ganymede, my new mistress's brother.
Enter ROSALIND, with a paper, reading
From the east to western Ind,
No jewel is like Rosalind.
Her worth, being mounted on the wind,
Through all the world bears Rosalind.
All the pictures fairest lined
Are but black to Rosalind.
Let no fair be kept in mind
But the fair of Rosalind.
I'll rhyme you so eight years together, dinners and
suppers and sleeping-hours excepted: it is the
right butter-women's rank to market.
Out, fool!
For a taste:
If a hart do lack a hind,
Let him seek out Rosalind.
If the cat will after kind,
So be sure will Rosalind.
Winter garments must be lined,
So must slender Rosalind.
They that reap must sheaf and bind
Then to cart with Rosalind.
Sweetest nut hath sourest rind,
Such a nut is Rosalind.
He that sweetest rose will find
Must find love's prick and Rosalind.
This is the very false gallop of verses: why do you
infect yourself with them?
Peace, you dull fool! I found them on a tree.
Truly, the tree yields bad fruit.
I'll graff it with you, and then I shall graff it
with a medlar: then it will be the earliest fruit
i' the country
ripe, and that's the right virtue of the medlar.
You have said
forest judge.
Enter CELIA, with a writing
Peace! Here comes my sister, reading: stand aside.
[Reads]
Why should this a desert be?
For it is unpeopled? No:
Tongues I'll hang on every tree,
That shall civil sayings show:
Some, how brief the life of man
Runs his erring pilgrimage,
That the stretching of a span
Buckles in his sum of age
Some, of violated vows
'Twixt the souls of friend and friend:
But upon the fairest boughs,
Or at every sentence end,
Will I Rosalinda write,
Teaching all that read to know
The quintessence of every sprite
Heaven would in little show.
Therefore Heaven Nature charged
That one body should be fill'd
With all graces wide-enlarged:
Nature presently distill'd
Helen's cheek, but not her heart,
Cleopatra's majesty,
Atalanta's better part,
Sad Lucretia's modesty.
Thus Rosalind of many parts
By heavenly synod was devised,
Of many faces, eyes and hearts,
To have the touches dearest prized.
Heaven would that she these gifts should have,
And I to live and die her slave.
O most gentle pulpiter! what tedious homily of love
have you wearied your parishioners withal, and never
cried 'Have patience, good people!'
How now! back, friends! Shepherd, go off a little.
Go with him, sirrah.
Come, shepherd, let us make an honourable retreat
though not with bag and baggage, yet with scrip and scrippage.
Exeunt CORIN and TOUCHSTONE
Didst thou hear these verses?
O, yes, I heard them all, and more too
them had in them more feet than the verses would bear.
That's no matter: the feet might bear the verses.
Ay, but the feet were lame and could not bear
themselves without the verse and therefore stood
lamely in the verse.
But didst thou hear without wondering how thy name
should be hanged and carved upon these trees?
I was seven of the nine days out of the wonder
before you came
palm-tree. I was never so be-rhymed since
Pythagoras' time, that I was an Irish rat, which I
can hardly remember.
Trow you who hath done this?
Is it a man?
And a chain, that you once wore, about his neck.
Change you colour?
I prithee, who?
O Lord, Lord! it is a hard matter for friends to
meet
and so encounter.
Nay, but who is it?
Is it possible?
Nay, I prithee now with most petitionary vehemence,
tell me who it is.
O wonderful, wonderful, and most wonderful
wonderful! and yet again wonderful, and after that,
out of all hooping!
Good my complexion! dost thou think, though I am
caparisoned like a man, I have a doublet and hose in
my disposition? One inch of delay more is a
South-sea of discovery
quickly, and speak apace. I would thou couldst
stammer, that thou mightst pour this concealed man
out of thy mouth, as wine comes out of a narrow-
mouthed bottle, either too much at once, or none at
all. I prithee, take the cork out of thy mouth that
may drink thy tidings.
So you may put a man in your belly.
Is he of God's making? What manner of man? Is his
head worth a hat, or his chin worth a beard?
Nay, he hath but a little beard.
Why, God will send more, if the man will be
thankful: let me stay the growth of his beard, if
thou delay me not the knowledge of his chin.
It is young Orlando, that tripped up the wrestler's
heels and your heart both in an instant.
Nay, but the devil take mocking: speak, sad brow and
true maid.
I' faith, coz, 'tis he.
Orlando?
Orlando.
Alas the day! what shall I do with my doublet and
hose? What did he when thou sawest him? What said
he? How looked he? Wherein went he? What makes
him here? Did he ask for me? Where remains he?
How parted he with thee? and when shalt thou see
him again? Answer me in one word.
You must borrow me Gargantua's mouth first: 'tis a
word too great for any mouth of this age's size. To
say ay and no to these particulars is more than to
answer in a catechism.
But doth he know that I am in this forest and in
man's apparel? Looks he as freshly as he did the
day he wrestled?
It is as easy to count atomies as to resolve the
propositions of a lover
finding him, and relish it with good observance.
I found him under a tree, like a dropped acorn.
It may well be called Jove's tree, when it drops
forth such fruit.
Give me audience, good madam.
Proceed.
There lay he, stretched along, like a wounded knight.
Though it be pity to see such a sight, it well
becomes the ground.
Cry 'holla' to thy tongue, I prithee
unseasonably. He was furnished like a hunter.
O, ominous! he comes to kill my heart.
I would sing my song without a burden: thou bringest
me out of tune.
Do you not know I am a woman? when I think, I must
speak. Sweet, say on.
You bring me out. Soft! comes he not here?
Enter ORLANDO and JAQUES
'Tis he: slink by, and note him.
I thank you for your company
as lief have been myself alone.
And so had I
too for your society.
God be wi' you: let's meet as little as we can.
I do desire we may be better strangers.
I pray you, mar no more trees with writing
love-songs in their barks.
I pray you, mar no more of my verses with reading
them ill-favouredly.
Rosalind is your love's name?
Yes, just.
I do not like her name.
There was no thought of pleasing you when she was
christened.
What stature is she of?
Just as high as my heart.
You are full of pretty answers. Have you not been
acquainted with goldsmiths' wives, and conned them
out of rings?
Not so
whence you have studied your questions.
You have a nimble wit: I think 'twas made of
Atalanta's heels. Will you sit down with me? and
we two will rail against our mistress the world and
all our misery.
I will chide no breather in the world but myself,
against whom I know most faults.
The worst fault you have is to be in love.
'Tis a fault I will not change for your best virtue.
I am weary of you.
By my troth, I was seeking for a fool when I found
you.
He is drowned in the brook: look but in, and you
shall see him.
There I shall see mine own figure.
Which I take to be either a fool or a cipher.
I'll tarry no longer with you: farewell, good
Signior Love.
I am glad of your departure: adieu, good Monsieur
Melancholy.
Exit JAQUES
[Aside to CELIA]  I will speak to him, like a saucy
lackey and under that habit play the knave with him.
Do you hear, forester?
Very well: what would you?
I pray you, what is't o'clock?
You should ask me what time o' day: there's no clock
in the forest.
Then there is no true lover in the forest
sighing every minute and groaning every hour would
detect the lazy foot of Time as well as a clock.
And why not the swift foot of Time? had not that
been as proper?
By no means, sir: Time travels in divers paces with
divers persons. I'll tell you who Time ambles
withal, who Time trots withal, who Time gallops
withal and who he stands still withal.
I prithee, who doth he trot withal?
Marry, he trots hard with a young maid between the
contract of her marriage and the day it is
solemnized: if the interim be but a se'nnight,
Time's pace is so hard that it seems the length of
seven year.
Who ambles Time withal?
With a priest that lacks Latin and a rich man that
hath not the gout, for the one sleeps easily because
he cannot study, and the other lives merrily because
he feels no pain, the one lacking the burden of lean
and wasteful learning, the other knowing no burden
of heavy tedious penury
Who doth he gallop withal?
With a thief to the gallows, for though he go as
softly as foot can fall, he thinks himself too soon there.
Who stays it still withal?
With lawyers in the vacation, for they sleep between
term and term and then they perceive not how Time moves.
Where dwell you, pretty youth?
With this shepherdess, my sister
skirts of the forest, like fringe upon a petticoat.
Are you native of this place?
As the cony that you see dwell where she is kindled.
Your accent is something finer than you could
purchase in so removed a dwelling.
I have been told so of many: but indeed an old
religious uncle of mine taught me to speak, who was
in his youth an inland man
too well, for there he fell in love. I have heard
him read many lectures against it, and I thank God
I am not a woman, to be touched with so many
giddy offences as he hath generally taxed their
whole sex withal.
Can you remember any of the principal evils that he
laid to the charge of women?
There were none principal
another as half-pence are, every one fault seeming
monstrous till his fellow fault came to match it.
I prithee, recount some of them.
No, I will not cast away my physic but on those that
are sick. There is a man haunts the forest, that
abuses our young plants with carving 'Rosalind' on
their barks
on brambles, all, forsooth, deifying the name of
Rosalind: if I could meet that fancy-monger I would
give him some good counsel, for he seems to have the
quotidian of love upon him.
I am he that is so love-shaked: I pray you tell me
your remedy.
There is none of my uncle's marks upon you: he
taught me how to know a man in love
of rushes I am sure you are not prisoner.
What were his marks?
A lean cheek, which you have not, a blue eye and
sunken, which you have not, an unquestionable
spirit, which you have not, a beard neglected,
which you have not
simply your having in beard is a younger brother's
revenue: then your hose should be ungartered, your
bonnet unbanded, your sleeve unbuttoned, your shoe
untied and every thing about you demonstrating a
careless desolation
are rather point-device in your accoutrements as
loving yourself than seeming the lover of any other.
Fair youth, I would I could make thee believe I love.
Me believe it! you may as soon make her that you
love believe it
do than to confess she does: that is one of the
points in the which women still give the lie to
their consciences. But, in good sooth, are you he
that hangs the verses on the trees, wherein Rosalind
is so admired?
I swear to thee, youth, by the white hand of
Rosalind, I am that he, that unfortunate he.
But are you so much in love as your rhymes speak?
Neither rhyme nor reason can express how much.
Love is merely a madness, and, I tell you, deserves
as well a dark house and a whip as madmen do: and
the reason why they are not so punished and cured
is, that the lunacy is so ordinary that the whippers
are in love too. Yet I profess curing it by counsel.
Did you ever cure any so?
Yes, one, and in this manner. He was to imagine me
his love, his mistress
woo me: at which time would I, being but a moonish
youth, grieve, be effeminate, changeable, longing
and liking, proud, fantastical, apish, shallow,
inconstant, full of tears, full of smiles, for every
passion something and for no passion truly any
thing, as boys and women are for the most part
cattle of this colour
him
for him, then spit at him
from his mad humour of love to a living humour of
madness
the world, and to live in a nook merely monastic.
And thus I cured him
me to wash your liver as clean as a sound sheep's
heart, that there shall not be one spot of love in't.
I would not be cured, youth.
I would cure you, if you would but call me Rosalind
and come every day to my cote and woo me.
Now, by the faith of my love, I will: tell me
where it is.
Go with me to it and I'll show it you and by the way
you shall tell me where in the forest you live.
Will you go?
With all my heart, good youth.
Nay you must call me Rosalind. Come, sister, will you go?
Exeunt
SCENE III. The forest.
Enter TOUCHSTONE and AUDREY
Come apace, good Audrey: I will fetch up your
goats, Audrey. And how, Audrey? am I the man yet?
doth my simple feature content you?
Your features! Lord warrant us! what features!
I am here with thee and thy goats, as the most
capricious poet, honest Ovid, was among the Goths.
[Aside]  O knowledge ill-inhabited, worse than Jove
in a thatched house!
When a man's verses cannot be understood, nor a
man's good wit seconded with the forward child
Understanding, it strikes a man more dead than a
great reckoning in a little room. Truly, I would
the gods had made thee poetical.
I do not know what 'poetical' is: is it honest in
deed and word? is it a true thing?
No, truly
feigning
they swear in poetry may be said as lovers they do feign.
Do you wish then that the gods had made me poetical?
I do, truly
honest: now, if thou wert a poet, I might have some
hope thou didst feign.
Would you not have me honest?
No, truly, unless thou wert hard-favoured
honesty coupled to beauty is to have honey a sauce to sugar.
[Aside]  A material fool!
Well, I am not fair
make me honest.
Truly, and to cast away honesty upon a foul slut
were to put good meat into an unclean dish.
I am not a slut, though I thank the gods I am foul.
Well, praised be the gods for thy foulness!
sluttishness may come hereafter. But be it as it may
be, I will marry thee, and to that end I have been
with Sir Oliver Martext, the vicar of the next
village, who hath promised to meet me in this place
of the forest and to couple us.
[Aside]  I would fain see this meeting.
Well, the gods give us joy!
Amen. A man may, if he were of a fearful heart,
stagger in this attempt
but the wood, no assembly but horn-beasts. But what
though? C ourage! As horns are odious, they are
necessary. It is said, 'many a man knows no end of
his goods:' right
knows no end of them. Well, that is the dowry of
his wife
Even so. Poor men alone? No, no
hath them as huge as the rascal. Is the single man
therefore blessed? No: as a walled town is more
worthier than a village, so is the forehead of a
married man more honourable than the bare brow of a
bachelor
skill, by so much is a horn more precious than to
want. Here comes Sir Oliver.
Enter SIR OLIVER MARTEXT
Sir Oliver Martext, you are well met: will you
dispatch us here under this tree, or shall we go
with you to your chapel?
Is there none here to give the woman?
I will not take her on gift of any man.
Truly, she must be given, or the marriage is not lawful.
[Advancing]
Proceed, proceed	I'll give her.
Good even, good Master What-ye-call't: how do you,
sir? You are very well met: God 'ild you for your
last company: I am very glad to see you: even a
toy in hand here, sir: nay, pray be covered.
Will you be married, motley?
As the ox hath his bow, sir, the horse his curb and
the falcon her bells, so man hath his desires
as pigeons bill, so wedlock would be nibbling.
And will you, being a man of your breeding, be
married under a bush like a beggar? Get you to
church, and have a good priest that can tell you
what marriage is: this fellow will but join you
together as they join wainscot
prove a shrunk panel and, like green timber, warp, warp.
[Aside]  I am not in the mind but I were better to be
married of him than of another: for he is not like
to marry me well
will be a good excuse for me hereafter to leave my wife.
Go thou with me, and let me counsel thee.
'Come, sweet Audrey:
We must be married, or we must live in bawdry.
Farewell, good Master Oliver: not,--
O sweet Oliver,
O brave Oliver,
Leave me not behind thee: but,--
Wind away,
Begone, I say,
I will not to wedding with thee.
Exeunt JAQUES, TOUCHSTONE and AUDREY
'Tis no matter: ne'er a fantastical knave of them
all shall flout me out of my calling.
Exit
SCENE IV. The forest.
Enter ROSALIND and CELIA
Never talk to me
Do, I prithee
that tears do not become a man.
But have I not cause to weep?
As good cause as one would desire
His very hair is of the dissembling colour.
Something browner than Judas's marry, his kisses are
Judas's own children.
I' faith, his hair is of a good colour.
An excellent colour: your chestnut was ever the only colour.
And his kissing is as full of sanctity as the touch
of holy bread.
He hath bought a pair of cast lips of Diana: a nun
of winter's sisterhood kisses not more religiously
the very ice of chastity is in them.
But why did he swear he would come this morning, and
comes not?
Nay, certainly, there is no truth in him.
Do you think so?
Yes
horse-stealer, but for his verity in love, I do
think him as concave as a covered goblet or a
worm-eaten nut.
Not true in love?
Yes, when he is in
You have heard him swear downright he was.
'Was' is not 'is:' besides, the oath of a lover is
no stronger than the word of a tapster
both the confirmer of false reckonings. He attends
here in the forest on the duke your father.
I met the duke yesterday and had much question with
him: he asked me of what parentage I was
him, of as good as he
But what talk we of fathers, when there is such a
man as Orlando?
O, that's a brave man! he writes brave verses,
speaks brave words, swears brave oaths and breaks
them bravely, quite traverse, athwart the heart of
his lover
but on one side, breaks his staff like a noble
goose: but all's brave that youth mounts and folly
guides. Who comes here?
Enter CORIN
Mistress and master, you have oft inquired
After the shepherd that complain'd of love,
Who you saw sitting by me on the turf,
Praising the proud disdainful shepherdess
That was his mistress.
Well, and what of him?
If you will see a pageant truly play'd,
Between the pale complexion of true love
And the red glow of scorn and proud disdain,
Go hence a little and I shall conduct you,
If you will mark it.
O, come, let us remove:
The sight of lovers feedeth those in love.
Bring us to this sight, and you shall say
I'll prove a busy actor in their play.
Exeunt
SCENE V. Another part of the forest.
Enter SILVIUS and PHEBE
Sweet Phebe, do not scorn me
Say that you love me not, but say not so
In bitterness. The common executioner,
Whose heart the accustom'd sight of death makes hard,
Falls not the axe upon the humbled neck
But first begs pardon: will you sterner be
Than he that dies and lives by bloody drops?
Enter ROSALIND, CELIA, and CORIN, behind
I would not be thy executioner:
I fly thee, for I would not injure thee.
Thou tell'st me there is murder in mine eye:
'Tis pretty, sure, and very probable,
That eyes, that are the frail'st and softest things,
Who shut their coward gates on atomies,
Should be call'd tyrants, butchers, murderers!
Now I do frown on thee with all my heart
And if mine eyes can wound, now let them kill thee:
Now counterfeit to swoon
Or if thou canst not, O, for shame, for shame,
Lie not, to say mine eyes are murderers!
Now show the wound mine eye hath made in thee:
Scratch thee but with a pin, and there remains
Some scar of it
The cicatrice and capable impressure
Thy palm some moment keeps
Which I have darted at thee, hurt thee not,
Nor, I am sure, there is no force in eyes
That can do hurt.
O dear Phebe,
If ever,--as that ever may be near,--
You meet in some fresh cheek the power of fancy,
Then shall you know the wounds invisible
That love's keen arrows make.
But till that time
Come not thou near me: and when that time comes,
Afflict me with thy mocks, pity me not
As till that time I shall not pity thee.
And why, I pray you? Who might be your mother,
That you insult, exult, and all at once,
Over the wretched? What though you have no beauty,--
As, by my faith, I see no more in you
Than without candle may go dark to bed--
Must you be therefore proud and pitiless?
Why, what means this? Why do you look on me?
I see no more in you than in the ordinary
Of nature's sale-work. 'Od's my little life,
I think she means to tangle my eyes too!
No, faith, proud mistress, hope not after it:
'Tis not your inky brows, your black silk hair,
Your bugle eyeballs, nor your cheek of cream,
That can entame my spirits to your worship.
You foolish shepherd, wherefore do you follow her,
Like foggy south puffing with wind and rain?
You are a thousand times a properer man
Than she a woman: 'tis such fools as you
That makes the world full of ill-favour'd children:
'Tis not her glass, but you, that flatters her
And out of you she sees herself more proper
Than any of her lineaments can show her.
But, mistress, know yourself: down on your knees,
And thank heaven, fasting, for a good man's love:
For I must tell you friendly in your ear,
Sell when you can: you are not for all markets:
Cry the man mercy
Foul is most foul, being foul to be a scoffer.
So take her to thee, shepherd: fare you well.
Sweet youth, I pray you, chide a year together:
I had rather hear you chide than this man woo.
He's fallen in love with your foulness and she'll
fall in love with my anger. If it be so, as fast as
she answers thee with frowning looks, I'll sauce her
with bitter words. Why look you so upon me?
For no ill will I bear you.
I pray you, do not fall in love with me,
For I am falser than vows made in wine:
Besides, I like you not. If you will know my house,
'Tis at the tuft of olives here hard by.
Will you go, sister? Shepherd, ply her hard.
Come, sister. Shepherdess, look on him better,
And be not proud: though all the world could see,
None could be so abused in sight as he.
Come, to our flock.
Exeunt ROSALIND, CELIA and CORIN
Dead Shepherd, now I find thy saw of might,
'Who ever loved that loved not at first sight?'
Sweet Phebe,--
Ha, what say'st thou, Silvius?
Sweet Phebe, pity me.
Why, I am sorry for thee, gentle Silvius.
Wherever sorrow is, relief would be:
If you do sorrow at my grief in love,
By giving love your sorrow and my grief
Were both extermined.
Thou hast my love: is not that neighbourly?
I would have you.
Why, that were covetousness.
Silvius, the time was that I hated thee,
And yet it is not that I bear thee love
But since that thou canst talk of love so well,
Thy company, which erst was irksome to me,
I will endure, and I'll employ thee too:
But do not look for further recompense
Than thine own gladness that thou art employ'd.
So holy and so perfect is my love,
And I in such a poverty of grace,
That I shall think it a most plenteous crop
To glean the broken ears after the man
That the main harvest reaps: loose now and then
A scatter'd smile, and that I'll live upon.
Know'st now the youth that spoke to me erewhile?
Not very well, but I have met him oft
And he hath bought the cottage and the bounds
That the old carlot once was master of.
Think not I love him, though I ask for him:
'Tis but a peevish boy
But what care I for words? yet words do well
When he that speaks them pleases those that hear.
It is a pretty youth: not very pretty:
But, sure, he's proud, and yet his pride becomes him:
He'll make a proper man: the best thing in him
Is his complexion
Did make offence his eye did heal it up.
He is not very tall
His leg is but so so
There was a pretty redness in his lip,
A little riper and more lusty red
Than that mix'd in his cheek
Between the constant red and mingled damask.
There be some women, Silvius, had they mark'd him
In parcels as I did, would have gone near
To fall in love with him
I love him not nor hate him not
I have more cause to hate him than to love him:
For what had he to do to chide at me?
He said mine eyes were black and my hair black:
And, now I am remember'd, scorn'd at me:
I marvel why I answer'd not again:
But that's all one
I'll write to him a very taunting letter,
And thou shalt bear it: wilt thou, Silvius?
Phebe, with all my heart.
I'll write it straight
The matter's in my head and in my heart:
I will be bitter with him and passing short.
Go with me, Silvius.
Exeunt
ACT IV
SCENE I. The forest.
Enter ROSALIND, CELIA, and JAQUES
I prithee, pretty youth, let me be better acquainted
with thee.
They say you are a melancholy fellow.
I am so
Those that are in extremity of either are abominable
fellows and betray themselves to every modern
censure worse than drunkards.
Why, 'tis good to be sad and say nothing.
Why then, 'tis good to be a post.
I have neither the scholar's melancholy, which is
emulation, nor the musician's, which is fantastical,
nor the courtier's, which is proud, nor the
soldier's, which is ambitious, nor the lawyer's,
which is politic, nor the lady's, which is nice, nor
the lover's, which is all these: but it is a
melancholy of mine own, compounded of many simples,
extracted from many objects, and indeed the sundry's
contemplation of my travels, in which my often
rumination wraps me m a most humorous sadness.
A traveller! By my faith, you have great reason to
be sad: I fear you have sold your own lands to see
other men's
nothing, is to have rich eyes and poor hands.
Yes, I have gained my experience.
And your experience makes you sad: I had rather have
a fool to make me merry than experience to make me
sad
Enter ORLANDO
Good day and happiness, dear Rosalind!
Nay, then, God be wi' you, an you talk in blank verse.
Exit
Farewell, Monsieur Traveller: look you lisp and
wear strange suits, disable all the benefits of your
own country, be out of love with your nativity and
almost chide God for making you that countenance you
are, or I will scarce think you have swam in a
gondola. Why, how now, Orlando! where have you been
all this while? You a lover! An you serve me such
another trick, never come in my sight more.
My fair Rosalind, I come within an hour of my promise.
Break an hour's promise in love! He that will
divide a minute into a thousand parts and break but
a part of the thousandth part of a minute in the
affairs of love, it may be said of him that Cupid
hath clapped him o' the shoulder, but I'll warrant
him heart-whole.
Pardon me, dear Rosalind.
Nay, an you be so tardy, come no more in my sight: I
had as lief be wooed of a snail.
Of a snail?
Ay, of a snail
carries his house on his head
I think, than you make a woman: besides he brings
his destiny with him.
What's that?
Why, horns, which such as you are fain to be
beholding to your wives for: but he comes armed in
his fortune and prevents the slander of his wife.
Virtue is no horn-maker
And I am your Rosalind.
It pleases him to call you so
Rosalind of a better leer than you.
Come, woo me, woo me, for now I am in a holiday
humour and like enough to consent. What would you
say to me now, an I were your very very Rosalind?
I would kiss before I spoke.
Nay, you were better speak first, and when you were
gravelled for lack of matter, you might take
occasion to kiss. Very good orators, when they are
out, they will spit
warn us!--matter, the cleanliest shift is to kiss.
How if the kiss be denied?
Then she puts you to entreaty, and there begins new matter.
Who could be out, being before his beloved mistress?
Marry, that should you, if I were your mistress, or
I should think my honesty ranker than my wit.
What, of my suit?
Not out of your apparel, and yet out of your suit.
Am not I your Rosalind?
I take some joy to say you are, because I would be
talking of her.
Well in her person I say I will not have you.
Then in mine own person I die.
No, faith, die by attorney. The poor world is
almost six thousand years old, and in all this time
there was not any man died in his own person,
videlicit, in a love-cause. Troilus had his brains
dashed out with a Grecian club
could to die before, and he is one of the patterns
of love. Leander, he would have lived many a fair
year, though Hero had turned nun, if it had not been
for a hot midsummer night
but forth to wash him in the Hellespont and being
taken with the cramp was drowned and the foolish
coroners of that age found it was 'Hero of Sestos.'
But these are all lies: men have died from time to
time and worms have eaten them, but not for love.
I would not have my right Rosalind of this mind,
for, I protest, her frown might kill me.
By this hand, it will not kill a fly. But come, now
I will be your Rosalind in a more coming-on
disposition, and ask me what you will. I will grant
it.
Then love me, Rosalind.
Yes, faith, will I, Fridays and Saturdays and all.
And wilt thou have me?
Ay, and twenty such.
What sayest thou?
Are you not good?
I hope so.
Why then, can one desire too much of a good thing?
Come, sister, you shall be the priest and marry us.
Give me your hand, Orlando. What do you say, sister?
Pray thee, marry us.
I cannot say the words.
You must begin, 'Will you, Orlando--'
Go to. Will you, Orlando, have to wife this Rosalind?
I will.
Ay, but when?
Why now
Then you must say 'I take thee, Rosalind, for wife.'
I take thee, Rosalind, for wife.
I might ask you for your commission
thee, Orlando, for my husband: there's a girl goes
before the priest
runs before her actions.
So do all thoughts
Now tell me how long you would have her after you
have possessed her.
For ever and a day.
Say 'a day,' without the 'ever.' No, no, Orlando
men are April when they woo, December when they wed:
maids are May when they are maids, but the sky
changes when they are wives. I will be more jealous
of thee than a Barbary cock-pigeon over his hen,
more clamorous than a parrot against rain, more
new-fangled than an ape, more giddy in my desires
than a monkey: I will weep for nothing, like Diana
in the fountain, and I will do that when you are
disposed to be merry
that when thou art inclined to sleep.
But will my Rosalind do so?
By my life, she will do as I do.
O, but she is wise.
Or else she could not have the wit to do this: the
wiser, the waywarder: make the doors upon a woman's
wit and it will out at the casement
'twill out at the key-hole
with the smoke out at the chimney.
A man that had a wife with such a wit, he might say
'Wit, whither wilt?'
Nay, you might keep that cheque for it till you met
your wife's wit going to your neighbour's bed.
And what wit could wit have to excuse that?
Marry, to say she came to seek you there. You shall
never take her without her answer, unless you take
her without her tongue. O, that woman that cannot
make her fault her husband's occasion, let her
never nurse her child herself, for she will breed
it like a fool!
For these two hours, Rosalind, I will leave thee.
Alas! dear love, I cannot lack thee two hours.
I must attend the duke at dinner: by two o'clock I
will be with thee again.
Ay, go your ways, go your ways
would prove: my friends told me as much, and I
thought no less: that flattering tongue of yours
won me: 'tis but one cast away, and so, come,
death! Two o'clock is your hour?
Ay, sweet Rosalind.
By my troth, and in good earnest, and so God mend
me, and by all pretty oaths that are not dangerous,
if you break one jot of your promise or come one
minute behind your hour, I will think you the most
pathetical break-promise and the most hollow lover
and the most unworthy of her you call Rosalind that
may be chosen out of the gross band of the
unfaithful: therefore beware my censure and keep
your promise.
With no less religion than if thou wert indeed my
Rosalind: so adieu.
Well, Time is the old justice that examines all such
offenders, and let Time try: adieu.
Exit ORLANDO
You have simply misused our sex in your love-prate:
we must have your doublet and hose plucked over your
head, and show the world what the bird hath done to
her own nest.
O coz, coz, coz, my pretty little coz, that thou
didst know how many fathom deep I am in love! But
it cannot be sounded: my affection hath an unknown
bottom, like the bay of Portugal.
Or rather, bottomless, that as fast as you pour
affection in, it runs out.
No, that same wicked bastard of Venus that was begot
of thought, conceived of spleen and born of madness,
that blind rascally boy that abuses every one's eyes
because his own are out, let him be judge how deep I
am in love. I'll tell thee, Aliena, I cannot be out
of the sight of Orlando: I'll go find a shadow and
sigh till he come.
And I'll sleep.
Exeunt
SCENE II. The forest.
Enter JAQUES, Lords, and Foresters
Which is he that killed the deer?
Sir, it was I.
Let's present him to the duke, like a Roman
conqueror
horns upon his head, for a branch of victory. Have
you no song, forester, for this purpose?
Yes, sir.
Sing it: 'tis no matter how it be in tune, so it
make noise enough.
SONG.
What shall he have that kill'd the deer?
His leather skin and horns to wear.
Then sing him home
The rest shall bear this burden
Take thou no scorn to wear the horn
It was a crest ere thou wast born:
Thy father's father wore it,
And thy father bore it:
The horn, the horn, the lusty horn
Is not a thing to laugh to scorn.
Exeunt
SCENE III. The forest.
Enter ROSALIND and CELIA
How say you now? Is it not past two o'clock? and
here much Orlando!
I warrant you, with pure love and troubled brain, he
hath ta'en his bow and arrows and is gone forth to
sleep. Look, who comes here.
Enter SILVIUS
My errand is to you, fair youth
My gentle Phebe bid me give you this:
I know not the contents
By the stern brow and waspish action
Which she did use as she was writing of it,
It bears an angry tenor: pardon me:
I am but as a guiltless messenger.
Patience herself would startle at this letter
And play the swaggerer
She says I am not fair, that I lack manners
She calls me proud, and that she could not love me,
Were man as rare as phoenix. 'Od's my will!
Her love is not the hare that I do hunt:
Why writes she so to me? Well, shepherd, well,
This is a letter of your own device.
No, I protest, I know not the contents:
Phebe did write it.
Come, come, you are a fool
And turn'd into the extremity of love.
I saw her hand: she has a leathern hand.
A freestone-colour'd hand
That her old gloves were on, but 'twas her hands:
She has a huswife's hand
I say she never did invent this letter
This is a man's invention and his hand.
Sure, it is hers.
Why, 'tis a boisterous and a cruel style.
A style for-challengers
Like Turk to Christian: women's gentle brain
Could not drop forth such giant-rude invention
Such Ethiope words, blacker in their effect
Than in their countenance. Will you hear the letter?
So please you, for I never heard it yet
Yet heard too much of Phebe's cruelty.
She Phebes me: mark how the tyrant writes.
Reads
Art thou god to shepherd turn'd,
That a maiden's heart hath burn'd?
Can a woman rail thus?
Call you this railing?
[Reads]
Why, thy godhead laid apart,
Warr'st thou with a woman's heart?
Did you ever hear such railing?
Whiles the eye of man did woo me,
That could do no vengeance to me.
Meaning me a beast.
If the scorn of your bright eyne
Have power to raise such love in mine,
Alack, in me what strange effect
Would they work in mild aspect!
Whiles you chid me, I did love
How then might your prayers move!
He that brings this love to thee
Little knows this love in me:
And by him seal up thy mind
Whether that thy youth and kind
Will the faithful offer take
Of me and all that I can make
Or else by him my love deny,
And then I'll study how to die.
Call you this chiding?
Alas, poor shepherd!
Do you pity him? no, he deserves no pity. Wilt
thou love such a woman? What, to make thee an
instrument and play false strains upon thee! not to
be endured! Well, go your way to her, for I see
love hath made thee a tame snake, and say this to
her: that if she love me, I charge her to love
thee
thou entreat for her. If you be a true lover,
hence, and not a word
Exit SILVIUS
Enter OLIVER
Good morrow, fair ones: pray you, if you know,
Where in the purlieus of this forest stands
A sheep-cote fenced about with olive trees?
West of this place, down in the neighbour bottom:
The rank of osiers by the murmuring stream
Left on your right hand brings you to the place.
But at this hour the house doth keep itself
There's none within.
If that an eye may profit by a tongue,
Then should I know you by description
Such garments and such years: 'The boy is fair,
Of female favour, and bestows himself
Like a ripe sister: the woman low
And browner than her brother.' Are not you
The owner of the house I did inquire for?
It is no boast, being ask'd, to say we are.
Orlando doth commend him to you both,
And to that youth he calls his Rosalind
He sends this bloody napkin. Are you he?
I am: what must we understand by this?
Some of my shame
What man I am, and how, and why, and where
This handkercher was stain'd.
I pray you, tell it.
When last the young Orlando parted from you
He left a promise to return again
Within an hour, and pacing through the forest,
Chewing the food of sweet and bitter fancy,
Lo, what befell! he threw his eye aside,
And mark what object did present itself:
Under an oak, whose boughs were moss'd with age
And high top bald with dry antiquity,
A wretched ragged man, o'ergrown with hair,
Lay sleeping on his back: about his neck
A green and gilded snake had wreathed itself,
Who with her head nimble in threats approach'd
The opening of his mouth
Seeing Orlando, it unlink'd itself,
And with indented glides did slip away
Into a bush: under which bush's shade
A lioness, with udders all drawn dry,
Lay couching, head on ground, with catlike watch,
When that the sleeping man should stir
The royal disposition of that beast
To prey on nothing that doth seem as dead:
This seen, Orlando did approach the man
And found it was his brother, his elder brother.
O, I have heard him speak of that same brother
And he did render him the most unnatural
That lived amongst men.
And well he might so do,
For well I know he was unnatural.
But, to Orlando: did he leave him there,
Food to the suck'd and hungry lioness?
Twice did he turn his back and purposed so
But kindness, nobler ever than revenge,
And nature, stronger than his just occasion,
Made him give battle to the lioness,
Who quickly fell before him: in which hurtling
From miserable slumber I awaked.
Are you his brother?
Wast you he rescued?
Was't you that did so oft contrive to kill him?
'Twas I
To tell you what I was, since my conversion
So sweetly tastes, being the thing I am.
But, for the bloody napkin?
By and by.
When from the first to last betwixt us two
Tears our recountments had most kindly bathed,
As how I came into that desert place:--
In brief, he led me to the gentle duke,
Who gave me fresh array and entertainment,
Committing me unto my brother's love
Who led me instantly unto his cave,
There stripp'd himself, and here upon his arm
The lioness had torn some flesh away,
Which all this while had bled
And cried, in fainting, upon Rosalind.
Brief, I recover'd him, bound up his wound
And, after some small space, being strong at heart,
He sent me hither, stranger as I am,
To tell this story, that you might excuse
His broken promise, and to give this napkin
Dyed in his blood unto the shepherd youth
That he in sport doth call his Rosalind.
ROSALIND swoons
Why, how now, Ganymede! sweet Ganymede!
Many will swoon when they do look on blood.
There is more in it. Cousin Ganymede!
Look, he recovers.
I would I were at home.
We'll lead you thither.
I pray you, will you take him by the arm?
Be of good cheer, youth: you a man! you lack a
man's heart.
I do so, I confess it. Ah, sirrah, a body would
think this was well counterfeited! I pray you, tell
your brother how well I counterfeited. Heigh-ho!
This was not counterfeit: there is too great
testimony in your complexion that it was a passion
of earnest.
Counterfeit, I assure you.
Well then, take a good heart and counterfeit to be a man.
So I do: but, i' faith, I should have been a woman by right.
Come, you look paler and paler: pray you, draw
homewards. Good sir, go with us.
That will I, for I must bear answer back
How you excuse my brother, Rosalind.
I shall devise something: but, I pray you, commend
my counterfeiting to him. Will you go?
Exeunt
ACT V
SCENE I. The forest.
Enter TOUCHSTONE and AUDREY
We shall find a time, Audrey
Faith, the priest was good enough, for all the old
gentleman's saying.
A most wicked Sir Oliver, Audrey, a most vile
Martext. But, Audrey, there is a youth here in the
forest lays claim to you.
Ay, I know who 'tis
the world: here comes the man you mean.
It is meat and drink to me to see a clown: by my
troth, we that have good wits have much to answer
for
Enter WILLIAM
Good even, Audrey.
God ye good even, William.
And good even to you, sir.
Good even, gentle friend. Cover thy head, cover thy
head
Five and twenty, sir.
A ripe age. Is thy name William?
William, sir.
A fair name. Wast born i' the forest here?
Ay, sir, I thank God.
'Thank God
Faith, sir, so so.
'So so' is good, very good, very excellent good
yet it is not
Ay, sir, I have a pretty wit.
Why, thou sayest well. I do now remember a saying,
'The fool doth think he is wise, but the wise man
knows himself to be a fool.' The heathen
philosopher, when he had a desire to eat a grape,
would open his lips when he put it into his mouth
meaning thereby that grapes were made to eat and
lips to open. You do love this maid?
I do, sir.
Give me your hand. Art thou learned?
No, sir.
Then learn this of me: to have, is to have
is a figure in rhetoric that drink, being poured out
of a cup into a glass, by filling the one doth empty
the other
is he: now, you are not ipse, for I am he.
Which he, sir?
He, sir, that must marry this woman. Therefore, you
clown, abandon,--which is in the vulgar leave,--the
society,--which in the boorish is company,--of this
female,--which in the common is woman
together is, abandon the society of this female, or,
clown, thou perishest
understanding, diest
thee away, translate thy life into death, thy
liberty into bondage: I will deal in poison with
thee, or in bastinado, or in steel
with thee in faction
policy
therefore tremble and depart.
Do, good William.
God rest you merry, sir.
Exit
Enter CORIN
Our master and mistress seeks you
Trip, Audrey! trip, Audrey! I attend, I attend.
Exeunt
SCENE II. The forest.
Enter ORLANDO and OLIVER
Is't possible that on so little acquaintance you
should like her? that but seeing you should love
her? and loving woo? and, wooing, she should
grant? and will you persever to enjoy her?
Neither call the giddiness of it in question, the
poverty of her, the small acquaintance, my sudden
wooing, nor her sudden consenting
I love Aliena
consent with both that we may enjoy each other: it
shall be to your good
the revenue that was old Sir Rowland's will I
estate upon you, and here live and die a shepherd.
You have my consent. Let your wedding be to-morrow:
thither will I invite the duke and all's contented
followers. Go you and prepare Aliena
you, here comes my Rosalind.
Enter ROSALIND
God save you, brother.
And you, fair sister.
Exit
O, my dear Orlando, how it grieves me to see thee
wear thy heart in a scarf!
It is my arm.
I thought thy heart had been wounded with the claws
of a lion.
Wounded it is, but with the eyes of a lady.
Did your brother tell you how I counterfeited to
swoon when he showed me your handkerchief?
Ay, and greater wonders than that.
O, I know where you are: nay, 'tis true: there was
never any thing so sudden but the fight of two rams
and Caesar's thrasonical brag of 'I came, saw, and
overcame:' for your brother and my sister no sooner
met but they looked, no sooner looked but they
loved, no sooner loved but they sighed, no sooner
sighed but they asked one another the reason, no
sooner knew the reason but they sought the remedy
and in these degrees have they made a pair of stairs
to marriage which they will climb incontinent, or
else be incontinent before marriage: they are in
the very wrath of love and they will together
cannot part them.
They shall be married to-morrow, and I will bid the
duke to the nuptial. But, O, how bitter a thing it
is to look into happiness through another man's
eyes! By so much the more shall I to-morrow be at
the height of heart-heaviness, by how much I shall
think my brother happy in having what he wishes for.
Why then, to-morrow I cannot serve your turn for Rosalind?
I can live no longer by thinking.
I will weary you then no longer with idle talking.
Know of me then, for now I speak to some purpose,
that I know you are a gentleman of good conceit: I
speak not this that you should bear a good opinion
of my knowledge, insomuch I say I know you are
neither do I labour for a greater esteem than may in
some little measure draw a belief from you, to do
yourself good and not to grace me. Believe then, if
you please, that I can do strange things: I have,
since I was three year old, conversed with a
magician, most profound in his art and yet not
damnable. If you do love Rosalind so near the heart
as your gesture cries it out, when your brother
marries Aliena, shall you marry her: I know into
what straits of fortune she is driven
not impossible to me, if it appear not inconvenient
to you, to set her before your eyes tomorrow human
as she is and without any danger.
Speakest thou in sober meanings?
By my life, I do
say I am a magician. Therefore, put you in your
best array: bid your friends
married to-morrow, you shall, and to Rosalind, if you will.
Enter SILVIUS and PHEBE
Look, here comes a lover of mine and a lover of hers.
Youth, you have done me much ungentleness,
To show the letter that I writ to you.
I care not if I have: it is my study
To seem despiteful and ungentle to you:
You are there followed by a faithful shepherd
Look upon him, love him
Good shepherd, tell this youth what 'tis to love.
It is to be all made of sighs and tears
And so am I for Phebe.
And I for Ganymede.
And I for Rosalind.
And I for no woman.
It is to be all made of faith and service
And so am I for Phebe.
And I for Ganymede.
And I for Rosalind.
And I for no woman.
It is to be all made of fantasy,
All made of passion and all made of wishes,
All adoration, duty, and observance,
All humbleness, all patience and impatience,
All purity, all trial, all observance
And so am I for Phebe.
And so am I for Ganymede.
And so am I for Rosalind.
And so am I for no woman.
If this be so, why blame you me to love you?
If this be so, why blame you me to love you?
If this be so, why blame you me to love you?
Who do you speak to, 'Why blame you me to love you?'
To her that is not here, nor doth not hear.
Pray you, no more of this
of Irish wolves against the moon.
To SILVIUS
I will help you, if I can:
To PHEBE
I would love you, if I could. To-morrow meet me all together.
To PHEBE
I will marry you, if ever I marry woman, and I'll be
married to-morrow:
To ORLANDO
I will satisfy you, if ever I satisfied man, and you
shall be married to-morrow:
To SILVIUS
I will content you, if what pleases you contents
you, and you shall be married to-morrow.
To ORLANDO
As you love Rosalind, meet:
To SILVIUS
as you love Phebe, meet: and as I love no woman,
I'll meet. So fare you well: I have left you commands.
I'll not fail, if I live.
Nor I.
Nor I.
Exeunt
SCENE III. The forest.
Enter TOUCHSTONE and AUDREY
To-morrow is the joyful day, Audrey
we be married.
I do desire it with all my heart
no dishonest desire to desire to be a woman of the
world. Here comes two of the banished duke's pages.
Enter two Pages
Well met, honest gentleman.
By my troth, well met. Come, sit, sit, and a song.
We are for you: sit i' the middle.
Shall we clap into't roundly, without hawking or
spitting or saying we are hoarse, which are the only
prologues to a bad voice?
I'faith, i'faith
gipsies on a horse.
SONG.
It was a lover and his lass,
With a hey, and a ho, and a hey nonino,
That o'er the green corn-field did pass
In the spring time, the only pretty ring time,
When birds do sing, hey ding a ding, ding:
Sweet lovers love the spring.
Between the acres of the rye,
With a hey, and a ho, and a hey nonino
These pretty country folks would lie,
In spring time,  and c.
This carol they began that hour,
With a hey, and a ho, and a hey nonino,
How that a life was but a flower
In spring time,  and c.
And therefore take the present time,
With a hey, and a ho, and a hey nonino
For love is crowned with the prime
In spring time,  and c.
Truly, young gentlemen, though there was no great
matter in the ditty, yet the note was very
untuneable.
You are deceived, sir: we kept time, we lost not our time.
By my troth, yes
such a foolish song. God be wi' you
your voices! Come, Audrey.
Exeunt
SCENE IV. The forest.
Enter DUKE SENIOR, AMIENS, JAQUES, ORLANDO, OLIVER, and CELIA
Dost thou believe, Orlando, that the boy
Can do all this that he hath promised?
I sometimes do believe, and sometimes do not
As those that fear they hope, and know they fear.
Enter ROSALIND, SILVIUS, and PHEBE
Patience once more, whiles our compact is urged:
You say, if I bring in your Rosalind,
You will bestow her on Orlando here?
That would I, had I kingdoms to give with her.
And you say, you will have her, when I bring her?
That would I, were I of all kingdoms king.
You say, you'll marry me, if I be willing?
That will I, should I die the hour after.
But if you do refuse to marry me,
You'll give yourself to this most faithful shepherd?
So is the bargain.
You say, that you'll have Phebe, if she will?
Though to have her and death were both one thing.
I have promised to make all this matter even.
Keep you your word, O duke, to give your daughter
You yours, Orlando, to receive his daughter:
Keep your word, Phebe, that you'll marry me,
Or else refusing me, to wed this shepherd:
Keep your word, Silvius, that you'll marry her.
If she refuse me: and from hence I go,
To make these doubts all even.
Exeunt ROSALIND and CELIA
I do remember in this shepherd boy
Some lively touches of my daughter's favour.
My lord, the first time that I ever saw him
Methought he was a brother to your daughter:
But, my good lord, this boy is forest-born,
And hath been tutor'd in the rudiments
Of many desperate studies by his uncle,
Whom he reports to be a great magician,
Obscured in the circle of this forest.
Enter TOUCHSTONE and AUDREY
There is, sure, another flood toward, and these
couples are coming to the ark. Here comes a pair of
very strange beasts, which in all tongues are called fools.
Salutation and greeting to you all!
Good my lord, bid him welcome: this is the
motley-minded gentleman that I have so often met in
the forest: he hath been a courtier, he swears.
If any man doubt that, let him put me to my
purgation. I have trod a measure
a lady
with mine enemy
had four quarrels, and like to have fought one.
And how was that ta'en up?
Faith, we met, and found the quarrel was upon the
seventh cause.
How seventh cause? Good my lord, like this fellow.
I like him very well.
God 'ild you, sir
press in here, sir, amongst the rest of the country
copulatives, to swear and to forswear: according as
marriage binds and blood breaks: a poor virgin,
sir, an ill-favoured thing, sir, but mine own
humour of mine, sir, to take that that no man else
will: rich honesty dwells like a miser, sir, in a
poor house
By my faith, he is very swift and sententious.
According to the fool's bolt, sir, and such dulcet diseases.
But, for the seventh cause
quarrel on the seventh cause?
Upon a lie seven times removed:--bear your body more
seeming, Audrey:--as thus, sir. I did dislike the
cut of a certain courtier's beard: he sent me word,
if I said his beard was not cut well, he was in the
mind it was: this is called the Retort Courteous.
If I sent him word again 'it was not well cut,' he
would send me word, he cut it to please himself:
this is called the Quip Modest. If again 'it was
not well cut,' he disabled my judgment: this is
called the Reply Churlish. If again 'it was not
well cut,' he would answer, I spake not true: this
is called the Reproof Valiant. If again 'it was not
well cut,' he would say I lied: this is called the
Counter-cheque Quarrelsome: and so to the Lie
Circumstantial and the Lie Direct.
And how oft did you say his beard was not well cut?
I durst go no further than the Lie Circumstantial,
nor he durst not give me the Lie Direct
measured swords and parted.
Can you nominate in order now the degrees of the lie?
O sir, we quarrel in print, by the book
books for good manners: I will name you the degrees.
The first, the Retort Courteous
Quip Modest
fourth, the Reproof Valiant
Countercheque Quarrelsome
Circumstance
these you may avoid but the Lie Direct
avoid that too, with an If. I knew when seven
justices could not take up a quarrel, but when the
parties were met themselves, one of them thought but
of an If, as, 'If you said so, then I said so
they shook hands and swore brothers. Your If is the
only peacemaker
Is not this a rare fellow, my lord? he's as good at
any thing and yet a fool.
He uses his folly like a stalking-horse and under
the presentation of that he shoots his wit.
Enter HYMEN, ROSALIND, and CELIA
Still Music
Then is there mirth in heaven,
When earthly things made even
Atone together.
Good duke, receive thy daughter
Hymen from heaven brought her,
Yea, brought her hither,
That thou mightst join her hand with his
Whose heart within his bosom is.
[To DUKE SENIOR]  To you I give myself, for I am yours.
To ORLANDO
To you I give myself, for I am yours.
If there be truth in sight, you are my daughter.
If there be truth in sight, you are my Rosalind.
If sight and shape be true,
Why then, my love adieu!
I'll have no father, if you be not he:
I'll have no husband, if you be not he:
Nor ne'er wed woman, if you be not she.
Peace, ho! I bar confusion:
'Tis I must make conclusion
Of these most strange events:
Here's eight that must take hands
To join in Hymen's bands,
If truth holds true contents.
You and you no cross shall part:
You and you are heart in heart
You to his love must accord,
Or have a woman to your lord:
You and you are sure together,
As the winter to foul weather.
Whiles a wedlock-hymn we sing,
Feed yourselves with questioning
That reason wonder may diminish,
How thus we met, and these things finish.
SONG.
Wedding is great Juno's crown:
O blessed bond of board and bed!
'Tis Hymen peoples every town
High wedlock then be honoured:
Honour, high honour and renown,
To Hymen, god of every town!
O my dear niece, welcome thou art to me!
Even daughter, welcome, in no less degree.
I will not eat my word, now thou art mine
Thy faith my fancy to thee doth combine.
Enter JAQUES DE BOYS
Let me have audience for a word or two:
I am the second son of old Sir Rowland,
That bring these tidings to this fair assembly.
Duke Frederick, hearing how that every day
Men of great worth resorted to this forest,
Address'd a mighty power
In his own conduct, purposely to take
His brother here and put him to the sword:
And to the skirts of this wild wood he came
Where meeting with an old religious man,
After some question with him, was converted
Both from his enterprise and from the world,
His crown bequeathing to his banish'd brother,
And all their lands restored to them again
That were with him exiled. This to be true,
I do engage my life.
Welcome, young man
Thou offer'st fairly to thy brothers' wedding:
To one his lands withheld, and to the other
A land itself at large, a potent dukedom.
First, in this forest, let us do those ends
That here were well begun and well begot:
And after, every of this happy number
That have endured shrewd days and nights with us
Shall share the good of our returned fortune,
According to the measure of their states.
Meantime, forget this new-fall'n dignity
And fall into our rustic revelry.
Play, music! And you, brides and bridegrooms all,
With measure heap'd in joy, to the measures fall.
Sir, by your patience. If I heard you rightly,
The duke hath put on a religious life
And thrown into neglect the pompous court?
He hath.
To him will I : out of these convertites
There is much matter to be heard and learn'd.
To DUKE SENIOR
You to your former honour I bequeath
Your patience and your virtue well deserves it:
To ORLANDO
You to a love that your true faith doth merit:
To OLIVER
You to your land and love and great allies:
To SILVIUS
You to a long and well-deserved bed:
To TOUCHSTONE
And you to wrangling
Is but for two months victuall'd. So, to your pleasures:
I am for other than for dancing measures.
Stay, Jaques, stay.
To see no pastime I	what you would have
I'll stay to know at your abandon'd cave.
Exit
Proceed, proceed: we will begin these rites,
As we do trust they'll end, in true delights.
A dance
EPILOGUE
It is not the fashion to see the lady the epilogue
but it is no more unhandsome than to see the lord
the prologue. If it be true that good wine needs
no bush, 'tis true that a good play needs no
epilogue
and good plays prove the better by the help of good
epilogues. What a case am I in then, that am
neither a good epilogue nor cannot insinuate with
you in the behalf of a good play! I am not
furnished like a beggar, therefore to beg will not
become me: my way is to conjure you
with the women. I charge you, O women, for the love
you bear to men, to like as much of this play as
please you: and I charge you, O men, for the love
you bear to women--as I perceive by your simpering,
none of you hates them--that between you and the
women the play may please. If I were a woman I
would kiss as many of you as had beards that pleased
me, complexions that liked me and breaths that I
defied not: and, I am sure, as many as have good
beards or good faces or sweet breaths will, for my
kind offer, when I make curtsy, bid me farewell.
Exeunt
ACT I
SCENE I. Alexandria. A room in CLEOPATRA's palace.
Enter DEMETRIUS and PHILO
Nay, but this dotage of our general's
O'erflows the measure: those his goodly eyes,
That o'er the files and musters of the war
Have glow'd like plated Mars, now bend, now turn,
The office and devotion of their view
Upon a tawny front: his captain's heart,
Which in the scuffles of great fights hath burst
The buckles on his breast, reneges all temper,
And is become the bellows and the fan
To cool a gipsy's lust.
Flourish. Enter ANTONY, CLEOPATRA, her Ladies, the Train, with Eunuchs fanning her
Look, where they come:
Take but good note, and you shall see in him.
The triple pillar of the world transform'd
Into a strumpet's fool: behold and see.
If it be love indeed, tell me how much.
There's beggary in the love that can be reckon'd.
I'll set a bourn how far to be beloved.
Then must thou needs find out new heaven, new earth.
Enter an Attendant
News, my good lord, from Rome.
Grates me: the sum.
Nay, hear them, Antony:
Fulvia perchance is angry
If the scarce-bearded Caesar have not sent
His powerful mandate to you, 'Do this, or this
Take in that kingdom, and enfranchise that
Perform 't, or else we damn thee.'
How, my love!
Perchance! nay, and most like:
You must not stay here longer, your dismission
Is come from Caesar
Where's Fulvia's process? Caesar's I would say? both?
Call in the messengers. As I am Egypt's queen,
Thou blushest, Antony
Is Caesar's homager: else so thy cheek pays shame
When shrill-tongued Fulvia scolds. The messengers!
Let Rome in Tiber melt, and the wide arch
Of the ranged empire fall! Here is my space.
Kingdoms are clay: our dungy earth alike
Feeds beast as man: the nobleness of life
Is to do thus
Embracing
And such a twain can do't, in which I bind,
On pain of punishment, the world to weet
We stand up peerless.
Excellent falsehood!
Why did he marry Fulvia, and not love her?
I'll seem the fool I am not
Will be himself.
But stirr'd by Cleopatra.
Now, for the love of Love and her soft hours,
Let's not confound the time with conference harsh:
There's not a minute of our lives should stretch
Without some pleasure now. What sport tonight?
Hear the ambassadors.
Fie, wrangling queen!
Whom every thing becomes, to chide, to laugh,
To weep
To make itself, in thee, fair and admired!
No messenger, but thine
To-night we'll wander through the streets and note
The qualities of people. Come, my queen
Last night you did desire it: speak not to us.
Exeunt MARK ANTONY and CLEOPATRA with their train
Is Caesar with Antonius prized so slight?
Sir, sometimes, when he is not Antony,
He comes too short of that great property
Which still should go with Antony.
I am full sorry
That he approves the common liar, who
Thus speaks of him at Rome: but I will hope
Of better deeds to-morrow. Rest you happy!
Exeunt
SCENE II. The same. Another room.
Enter CHARMIAN, IRAS, ALEXAS, and a Soothsayer
Lord Alexas, sweet Alexas, most any thing Alexas,
almost most absolute Alexas, where's the soothsayer
that you praised so to the queen? O, that I knew
this husband, which, you say, must charge his horns
with garlands!
Soothsayer!
Your will?
Is this the man? Is't you, sir, that know things?
In nature's infinite book of secrecy
A little I can read.
Show him your hand.
Enter DOMITIUS ENOBARBUS
Bring in the banquet quickly
Cleopatra's health to drink.
Good sir, give me good fortune.
I make not, but foresee.
Pray, then, foresee me one.
You shall be yet far fairer than you are.
He means in flesh.
No, you shall paint when you are old.
Wrinkles forbid!
Vex not his prescience
Hush!
You shall be more beloving than beloved.
I had rather heat my liver with drinking.
Nay, hear him.
Good now, some excellent fortune! Let me be married
to three kings in a forenoon, and widow them all:
let me have a child at fifty, to whom Herod of Jewry
may do homage: find me to marry me with Octavius
Caesar, and companion me with my mistress.
You shall outlive the lady whom you serve.
O excellent! I love long life better than figs.
You have seen and proved a fairer former fortune
Than that which is to approach.
Then belike my children shall have no names:
prithee, how many boys and wenches must I have?
If every of your wishes had a womb.
And fertile every wish, a million.
Out, fool! I forgive thee for a witch.
You think none but your sheets are privy to your wishes.
Nay, come, tell Iras hers.
We'll know all our fortunes.
Mine, and most of our fortunes, to-night, shall
be--drunk to bed.
There's a palm presages chastity, if nothing else.
E'en as the o'erflowing Nilus presageth famine.
Go, you wild bedfellow, you cannot soothsay.
Nay, if an oily palm be not a fruitful
prognostication, I cannot scratch mine ear. Prithee,
tell her but a worky-day fortune.
Your fortunes are alike.
But how, but how? give me particulars.
I have said.
Am I not an inch of fortune better than she?
Well, if you were but an inch of fortune better than
I, where would you choose it?
Not in my husband's nose.
Our worser thoughts heavens mend! Alexas,--come,
his fortune, his fortune! O, let him marry a woman
that cannot go, sweet Isis, I beseech thee! and let
her die too, and give him a worse! and let worst
follow worse, till the worst of all follow him
laughing to his grave, fifty-fold a cuckold! Good
Isis, hear me this prayer, though thou deny me a
matter of more weight
Amen. Dear goddess, hear that prayer of the people!
for, as it is a heartbreaking to see a handsome man
loose-wived, so it is a deadly sorrow to behold a
foul knave uncuckolded: therefore, dear Isis, keep
decorum, and fortune him accordingly!
Amen.
Lo, now, if it lay in their hands to make me a
cuckold, they would make themselves whores, but
they'ld do't!
Hush! here comes Antony.
Not he
Enter CLEOPATRA
Saw you my lord?
No, lady.
Was he not here?
No, madam.
He was disposed to mirth
A Roman thought hath struck him. Enobarbus!
Madam?
Seek him, and bring him hither.
Where's Alexas?
Here, at your service. My lord approaches.
We will not look upon him: go with us.
Exeunt
Enter MARK ANTONY with a Messenger and Attendants
Fulvia thy wife first came into the field.
Against my brother Lucius?
Ay:
But soon that war had end, and the time's state
Made friends of them, joining their force 'gainst Caesar
Whose better issue in the war, from Italy,
Upon the first encounter, drave them.
Well, what worst?
The nature of bad news infects the teller.
When it concerns the fool or coward. On:
Things that are past are done with me. 'Tis thus:
Who tells me true, though in his tale lie death,
I hear him as he flatter'd.
Labienus--
This is stiff news--hath, with his Parthian force,
Extended Asia from Euphrates
His conquering banner shook from Syria
To Lydia and to Ionia
Antony, thou wouldst say,--
O, my lord!
Speak to me home, mince not the general tongue:
Name Cleopatra as she is call'd in Rome
Rail thou in Fulvia's phrase
With such full licence as both truth and malice
Have power to utter. O, then we bring forth weeds,
When our quick minds lie still
Is as our earing. Fare thee well awhile.
At your noble pleasure.
Exit
From Sicyon, ho, the news! Speak there!
The man from Sicyon,--is there such an one?
He stays upon your will.
Let him appear.
These strong Egyptian fetters I must break,
Or lose myself in dotage.
Enter another Messenger
What are you?
Fulvia thy wife is dead.
Where died she?
In Sicyon:
Her length of sickness, with what else more serious
Importeth thee to know, this bears.
Gives a letter
Forbear me.
Exit Second Messenger
There's a great spirit gone! Thus did I desire it:
What our contempt doth often hurl from us,
We wish it ours again
By revolution lowering, does become
The opposite of itself: she's good, being gone
The hand could pluck her back that shoved her on.
I must from this enchanting queen break off:
Ten thousand harms, more than the ills I know,
My idleness doth hatch. How now! Enobarbus!
Re-enter DOMITIUS ENOBARBUS
What's your pleasure, sir?
I must with haste from hence.
Why, then, we kill all our women:
we see how mortal an unkindness is to them
if they suffer our departure, death's the word.
I must be gone.
Under a compelling occasion, let women die
pity to cast them away for nothing
them and a great cause, they should be esteemed
nothing. Cleopatra, catching but the least noise of
this, dies instantly
times upon far poorer moment: I do think there is
mettle in death, which commits some loving act upon
her, she hath such a celerity in dying.
She is cunning past man's thought.
Exit ALEXAS
Alack, sir, no
the finest part of pure love: we cannot call her
winds and waters sighs and tears
storms and tempests than almanacs can report: this
cannot be cunning in her
shower of rain as well as Jove.
Would I had never seen her.
O, sir, you had then left unseen a wonderful piece
of work
have discredited your travel.
Fulvia is dead.
Sir?
Fulvia is dead.
Fulvia!
Dead.
Why, sir, give the gods a thankful sacrifice. When
it pleaseth their deities to take the wife of a man
from him, it shows to man the tailors of the earth
comforting therein, that when old robes are worn
out, there are members to make new. If there were
no more women but Fulvia, then had you indeed a cut,
and the case to be lamented: this grief is crowned
with consolation
petticoat: and indeed the tears live in an onion
that should water this sorrow.
The business she hath broached in the state
Cannot endure my absence.
And the business you have broached here cannot be
without you
wholly depends on your abode.
No more light answers. Let our officers
Have notice what we purpose. I shall break
The cause of our expedience to the queen,
And get her leave to part. For not alone
The death of Fulvia, with more urgent touches,
Do strongly speak to us
Of many our contriving friends in Rome
Petition us at home: Sextus Pompeius
Hath given the dare to Caesar, and commands
The empire of the sea: our slippery people,
Whose love is never link'd to the deserver
Till his deserts are past, begin to throw
Pompey the Great and all his dignities
Upon his son
Higher than both in blood and life, stands up
For the main soldier: whose quality, going on,
The sides o' the world may danger: much is breeding,
Which, like the courser's hair, hath yet but life,
And not a serpent's poison. Say, our pleasure,
To such whose place is under us, requires
Our quick remove from hence.
I shall do't.
Exeunt
SCENE III. The same. Another room.
Enter CLEOPATRA, CHARMIAN, IRAS, and ALEXAS
Where is he?
I did not see him since.
See where he is, who's with him, what he does:
I did not send you: if you find him sad,
Say I am dancing
That I am sudden sick: quick, and return.
Exit ALEXAS
Madam, methinks, if you did love him dearly,
You do not hold the method to enforce
The like from him.
What should I do, I do not?
In each thing give him way, cross him nothing.
Thou teachest like a fool
Tempt him not so too far
In time we hate that which we often fear.
But here comes Antony.
Enter MARK ANTONY
I am sick and sullen.
I am sorry to give breathing to my purpose,--
Help me away, dear Charmian
It cannot be thus long, the sides of nature
Will not sustain it.
Now, my dearest queen,--
Pray you, stand further from me.
What's the matter?
I know, by that same eye, there's some good news.
What says the married woman? You may go:
Would she had never given you leave to come!
Let her not say 'tis I that keep you here:
I have no power upon you
The gods best know,--
O, never was there queen
So mightily betray'd! yet at the first
I saw the treasons planted.
Cleopatra,--
Why should I think you can be mine and true,
Though you in swearing shake the throned gods,
Who have been false to Fulvia? Riotous madness,
To be entangled with those mouth-made vows,
Which break themselves in swearing!
Most sweet queen,--
Nay, pray you, seek no colour for your going,
But bid farewell, and go: when you sued staying,
Then was the time for words: no going then
Eternity was in our lips and eyes,
Bliss in our brows' bent
But was a race of heaven: they are so still,
Or thou, the greatest soldier of the world,
Art turn'd the greatest liar.
How now, lady!
I would I had thy inches
There were a heart in Egypt.
Hear me, queen:
The strong necessity of time commands
Our services awhile
Remains in use with you. Our Italy
Shines o'er with civil swords: Sextus Pompeius
Makes his approaches to the port of Rome:
Equality of two domestic powers
Breed scrupulous faction: the hated, grown to strength,
Are newly grown to love: the condemn'd Pompey,
Rich in his father's honour, creeps apace,
Into the hearts of such as have not thrived
Upon the present state, whose numbers threaten
And quietness, grown sick of rest, would purge
By any desperate change: my more particular,
And that which most with you should safe my going,
Is Fulvia's death.
Though age from folly could not give me freedom,
It does from childishness: can Fulvia die?
She's dead, my queen:
Look here, and at thy sovereign leisure read
The garboils she awaked
See when and where she died.
O most false love!
Where be the sacred vials thou shouldst fill
With sorrowful water? Now I see, I see,
In Fulvia's death, how mine received shall be.
Quarrel no more, but be prepared to know
The purposes I bear
As you shall give the advice. By the fire
That quickens Nilus' slime, I go from hence
Thy soldier, servant
As thou affect'st.
Cut my lace, Charmian, come
But let it be: I am quickly ill, and well,
So Antony loves.
My precious queen, forbear
And give true evidence to his love, which stands
An honourable trial.
So Fulvia told me.
I prithee, turn aside and weep for her,
Then bid adieu to me, and say the tears
Belong to Egypt: good now, play one scene
Of excellent dissembling
Life perfect honour.
You'll heat my blood: no more.
You can do better yet
Now, by my sword,--
And target. Still he mends
But this is not the best. Look, prithee, Charmian,
How this Herculean Roman does become
The carriage of his chafe.
I'll leave you, lady.
Courteous lord, one word.
Sir, you and I must part, but that's not it:
Sir, you and I have loved, but there's not it
That you know well: something it is I would,
O, my oblivion is a very Antony,
And I am all forgotten.
But that your royalty
Holds idleness your subject, I should take you
For idleness itself.
'Tis sweating labour
To bear such idleness so near the heart
As Cleopatra this. But, sir, forgive me
Since my becomings kill me, when they do not
Eye well to you: your honour calls you hence
Therefore be deaf to my unpitied folly.
And all the gods go with you! upon your sword
Sit laurel victory! and smooth success
Be strew'd before your feet!
Let us go. Come
Our separation so abides, and flies,
That thou, residing here, go'st yet with me,
And I, hence fleeting, here remain with thee. Away!
Exeunt
SCENE IV. Rome. OCTAVIUS CAESAR's house.
Enter OCTAVIUS CAESAR, reading a letter, LEPIDUS, and their Train
You may see, Lepidus, and henceforth know,
It is not Caesar's natural vice to hate
Our great competitor: from Alexandria
This is the news: he fishes, drinks, and wastes
The lamps of night in revel
Than Cleopatra
More womanly than he
Vouchsafed to think he had partners: you shall find there
A man who is the abstract of all faults
That all men follow.
I must not think there are
Evils enow to darken all his goodness:
His faults in him seem as the spots of heaven,
More fiery by night's blackness
Rather than purchased
Than what he chooses.
You are too indulgent. Let us grant, it is not
Amiss to tumble on the bed of Ptolemy
To give a kingdom for a mirth
And keep the turn of tippling with a slave
To reel the streets at noon, and stand the buffet
With knaves that smell of sweat: say this
becomes him,--
As his composure must be rare indeed
Whom these things cannot blemish,--yet must Antony
No way excuse his soils, when we do bear
So great weight in his lightness. If he fill'd
His vacancy with his voluptuousness,
Full surfeits, and the dryness of his bones,
Call on him for't: but to confound such time,
That drums him from his sport, and speaks as loud
As his own state and ours,--'tis to be chid
As we rate boys, who, being mature in knowledge,
Pawn their experience to their present pleasure,
And so rebel to judgment.
Enter a Messenger
Here's more news.
Thy biddings have been done
Most noble Caesar, shalt thou have report
How 'tis abroad. Pompey is strong at sea
And it appears he is beloved of those
That only have fear'd Caesar: to the ports
The discontents repair, and men's reports
Give him much wrong'd.
I should have known no less.
It hath been taught us from the primal state,
That he which is was wish'd until he were
And the ebb'd man, ne'er loved till ne'er worth love,
Comes dear'd by being lack'd. This common body,
Like to a vagabond flag upon the stream,
Goes to and back, lackeying the varying tide,
To rot itself with motion.
Caesar, I bring thee word,
Menecrates and Menas, famous pirates,
Make the sea serve them, which they ear and wound
With keels of every kind: many hot inroads
They make in Italy
Lack blood to think on't, and flush youth revolt:
No vessel can peep forth, but 'tis as soon
Taken as seen
Than could his war resisted.
Antony,
Leave thy lascivious wassails. When thou once
Wast beaten from Modena, where thou slew'st
Hirtius and Pansa, consuls, at thy heel
Did famine follow
Though daintily brought up, with patience more
Than savages could suffer: thou didst drink
The stale of horses, and the gilded puddle
Which beasts would cough at: thy palate then did deign
The roughest berry on the rudest hedge
Yea, like the stag, when snow the pasture sheets,
The barks of trees thou browsed'st
It is reported thou didst eat strange flesh,
Which some did die to look on: and all this--
It wounds thine honour that I speak it now--
Was borne so like a soldier, that thy cheek
So much as lank'd not.
'Tis pity of him.
Let his shames quickly
Drive him to Rome: 'tis time we twain
Did show ourselves i' the field
Assemble we immediate council: Pompey
Thrives in our idleness.
To-morrow, Caesar,
I shall be furnish'd to inform you rightly
Both what by sea and land I can be able
To front this present time.
Till which encounter,
It is my business too. Farewell.
Farewell, my lord: what you shall know meantime
Of stirs abroad, I shall beseech you, sir,
To let me be partaker.
Doubt not, sir
I knew it for my bond.
Exeunt
SCENE V. Alexandria. CLEOPATRA's palace.
Enter CLEOPATRA, CHARMIAN, IRAS, and MARDIAN
Charmian!
Madam?
Ha, ha!
Give me to drink mandragora.
Why, madam?
That I might sleep out this great gap of time
My Antony is away.
You think of him too much.
O, 'tis treason!
Madam, I trust, not so.
Thou, eunuch Mardian!
What's your highness' pleasure?
Not now to hear thee sing
In aught an eunuch has: 'tis well for thee,
That, being unseminar'd, thy freer thoughts
May not fly forth of Egypt. Hast thou affections?
Yes, gracious madam.
Indeed!
Not in deed, madam
But what indeed is honest to be done:
Yet have I fierce affections, and think
What Venus did with Mars.
O Charmian,
Where think'st thou he is now? Stands he, or sits he?
Or does he walk? or is he on his horse?
O happy horse, to bear the weight of Antony!
Do bravely, horse! for wot'st thou whom thou movest?
The demi-Atlas of this earth, the arm
And burgonet of men. He's speaking now,
Or murmuring 'Where's my serpent of old Nile?'
For so he calls me: now I feed myself
With most delicious poison. Think on me,
That am with Phoebus' amorous pinches black,
And wrinkled deep in time? Broad-fronted Caesar,
When thou wast here above the ground, I was
A morsel for a monarch: and great Pompey
Would stand and make his eyes grow in my brow
There would he anchor his aspect and die
With looking on his life.
Enter ALEXAS, from OCTAVIUS CAESAR
Sovereign of Egypt, hail!
How much unlike art thou Mark Antony!
Yet, coming from him, that great medicine hath
With his tinct gilded thee.
How goes it with my brave Mark Antony?
Last thing he did, dear queen,
He kiss'd,--the last of many doubled kisses,--
This orient pearl. His speech sticks in my heart.
Mine ear must pluck it thence.
'Good friend,' quoth he,
'Say, the firm Roman to great Egypt sends
This treasure of an oyster
To mend the petty present, I will piece
Her opulent throne with kingdoms
Say thou, shall call her mistress.' So he nodded,
And soberly did mount an arm-gaunt steed,
Who neigh'd so high, that what I would have spoke
Was beastly dumb'd by him.
What, was he sad or merry?
Like to the time o' the year between the extremes
Of hot and cold, he was nor sad nor merry.
O well-divided disposition! Note him,
Note him good Charmian, 'tis the man
He was not sad, for he would shine on those
That make their looks by his
Which seem'd to tell them his remembrance lay
In Egypt with his joy
O heavenly mingle! Be'st thou sad or merry,
The violence of either thee becomes,
So does it no man else. Met'st thou my posts?
Ay, madam, twenty several messengers:
Why do you send so thick?
Who's born that day
When I forget to send to Antony,
Shall die a beggar. Ink and paper, Charmian.
Welcome, my good Alexas. Did I, Charmian,
Ever love Caesar so?
O that brave Caesar!
Be choked with such another emphasis!
Say, the brave Antony.
The valiant Caesar!
By Isis, I will give thee bloody teeth,
If thou with Caesar paragon again
My man of men.
By your most gracious pardon,
I sing but after you.
My salad days,
When I was green in judgment: cold in blood,
To say as I said then! But, come, away
Get me ink and paper:
He shall have every day a several greeting,
Or I'll unpeople Egypt.
Exeunt
ACT II
SCENE I. Messina. POMPEY's house.
Enter POMPEY, MENECRATES, and MENAS, in warlike manner
If the great gods be just, they shall assist
The deeds of justest men.
Know, worthy Pompey,
That what they do delay, they not deny.
Whiles we are suitors to their throne, decays
The thing we sue for.
We, ignorant of ourselves,
Beg often our own harms, which the wise powers
Deny us for our good
By losing of our prayers.
I shall do well:
The people love me, and the sea is mine
My powers are crescent, and my auguring hope
Says it will come to the full. Mark Antony
In Egypt sits at dinner, and will make
No wars without doors: Caesar gets money where
He loses hearts: Lepidus flatters both,
Of both is flatter'd
Nor either cares for him.
Caesar and Lepidus
Are in the field: a mighty strength they carry.
Where have you this? 'tis false.
From Silvius, sir.
He dreams: I know they are in Rome together,
Looking for Antony. But all the charms of love,
Salt Cleopatra, soften thy waned lip!
Let witchcraft join with beauty, lust with both!
Tie up the libertine in a field of feasts,
Keep his brain fuming
Sharpen with cloyless sauce his appetite
That sleep and feeding may prorogue his honour
Even till a Lethe'd dulness!
Enter VARRIUS
How now, Varrius!
This is most certain that I shall deliver:
Mark Antony is every hour in Rome
Expected: since he went from Egypt 'tis
A space for further travel.
I could have given less matter
A better ear. Menas, I did not think
This amorous surfeiter would have donn'd his helm
For such a petty war: his soldiership
Is twice the other twain: but let us rear
The higher our opinion, that our stirring
Can from the lap of Egypt's widow pluck
The ne'er-lust-wearied Antony.
I cannot hope
Caesar and Antony shall well greet together:
His wife that's dead did trespasses to Caesar
His brother warr'd upon him
Not moved by Antony.
I know not, Menas,
How lesser enmities may give way to greater.
Were't not that we stand up against them all,
'Twere pregnant they should square between
themselves
For they have entertained cause enough
To draw their swords: but how the fear of us
May cement their divisions and bind up
The petty difference, we yet not know.
Be't as our gods will have't! It only stands
Our lives upon to use our strongest hands.
Come, Menas.
Exeunt
SCENE II. Rome. The house of LEPIDUS.
Enter DOMITIUS ENOBARBUS and LEPIDUS
Good Enobarbus, 'tis a worthy deed,
And shall become you well, to entreat your captain
To soft and gentle speech.
I shall entreat him
To answer like himself: if Caesar move him,
Let Antony look over Caesar's head
And speak as loud as Mars. By Jupiter,
Were I the wearer of Antonius' beard,
I would not shave't to-day.
'Tis not a time
For private stomaching.
Every time
Serves for the matter that is then born in't.
But small to greater matters must give way.
Not if the small come first.
Your speech is passion:
But, pray you, stir no embers up. Here comes
The noble Antony.
Enter MARK ANTONY and VENTIDIUS
And yonder, Caesar.
Enter OCTAVIUS CAESAR, MECAENAS, and AGRIPPA
If we compose well here, to Parthia:
Hark, Ventidius.
I do not know,
Mecaenas
Noble friends,
That which combined us was most great, and let not
A leaner action rend us. What's amiss,
May it be gently heard: when we debate
Our trivial difference loud, we do commit
Murder in healing wounds: then, noble partners,
The rather, for I earnestly beseech,
Touch you the sourest points with sweetest terms,
Nor curstness grow to the matter.
'Tis spoken well.
Were we before our armies, and to fight.
I should do thus.
Flourish
Welcome to Rome.
Thank you.
Sit.
Sit, sir.
Nay, then.
I learn, you take things ill which are not so,
Or being, concern you not.
I must be laugh'd at,
If, or for nothing or a little, I
Should say myself offended, and with you
Chiefly i' the world
Once name you derogately, when to sound your name
It not concern'd me.
My being in Egypt, Caesar,
What was't to you?
No more than my residing here at Rome
Might be to you in Egypt: yet, if you there
Did practise on my state, your being in Egypt
Might be my question.
How intend you, practised?
You may be pleased to catch at mine intent
By what did here befal me. Your wife and brother
Made wars upon me
Was theme for you, you were the word of war.
You do mistake your business
Did urge me in his act: I did inquire it
And have my learning from some true reports,
That drew their swords with you. Did he not rather
Discredit my authority with yours
And make the wars alike against my stomach,
Having alike your cause? Of this my letters
Before did satisfy you. If you'll patch a quarrel,
As matter whole you have not to make it with,
It must not be with this.
You praise yourself
By laying defects of judgment to me
You patch'd up your excuses.
Not so, not so
I know you could not lack, I am certain on't,
Very necessity of this thought, that I,
Your partner in the cause 'gainst which he fought,
Could not with graceful eyes attend those wars
Which fronted mine own peace. As for my wife,
I would you had her spirit in such another:
The third o' the world is yours
You may pace easy, but not such a wife.
Would we had all such wives, that the men might go
to wars with the women!
So much uncurbable, her garboils, Caesar
Made out of her impatience, which not wanted
Shrewdness of policy too, I grieving grant
Did you too much disquiet: for that you must
But say, I could not help it.
I wrote to you
When rioting in Alexandria
Did pocket up my letters, and with taunts
Did gibe my missive out of audience.
Sir,
He fell upon me ere admitted: then
Three kings I had newly feasted, and did want
Of what I was i' the morning: but next day
I told him of myself
As to have ask'd him pardon. Let this fellow
Be nothing of our strife
Out of our question wipe him.
You have broken
The article of your oath
Have tongue to charge me with.
Soft, Caesar!
No,
Lepidus, let him speak:
The honour is sacred which he talks on now,
Supposing that I lack'd it. But, on, Caesar
The article of my oath.
To lend me arms and aid when I required them
The which you both denied.
Neglected, rather
And then when poison'd hours had bound me up
From mine own knowledge. As nearly as I may,
I'll play the penitent to you: but mine honesty
Shall not make poor my greatness, nor my power
Work without it. Truth is, that Fulvia,
To have me out of Egypt, made wars here
For which myself, the ignorant motive, do
So far ask pardon as befits mine honour
To stoop in such a case.
'Tis noble spoken.
If it might please you, to enforce no further
The griefs between ye: to forget them quite
Were to remember that the present need
Speaks to atone you.
Worthily spoken, Mecaenas.
Or, if you borrow one another's love for the
instant, you may, when you hear no more words of
Pompey, return it again: you shall have time to
wrangle in when you have nothing else to do.
Thou art a soldier only: speak no more.
That truth should be silent I had almost forgot.
You wrong this presence
Go to, then
I do not much dislike the matter, but
The manner of his speech
We shall remain in friendship, our conditions
So differing in their acts. Yet if I knew
What hoop should hold us stanch, from edge to edge
O' the world I would pursue it.
Give me leave, Caesar,--
Speak, Agrippa.
Thou hast a sister by the mother's side,
Admired Octavia: great Mark Antony
Is now a widower.
Say not so, Agrippa:
If Cleopatra heard you, your reproof
Were well deserved of rashness.
I am not married, Caesar: let me hear
Agrippa further speak.
To hold you in perpetual amity,
To make you brothers, and to knit your hearts
With an unslipping  knot, take Antony
Octavia to his wife
No worse a husband than the best of men
Whose virtue and whose general graces speak
That which none else can utter. By this marriage,
All little jealousies, which now seem great,
And all great fears, which now import their dangers,
Would then be nothing: truths would be tales,
Where now half tales be truths: her love to both
Would, each to other and all loves to both,
Draw after her. Pardon what I have spoke
For 'tis a studied, not a present thought,
By duty ruminated.
Will Caesar speak?
Not till he hears how Antony is touch'd
With what is spoke already.
What power is in Agrippa,
If I would say, 'Agrippa, be it so,'
To make this good?
The power of Caesar, and
His power unto Octavia.
May I never
To this good purpose, that so fairly shows,
Dream of impediment! Let me have thy hand:
Further this act of grace: and from this hour
The heart of brothers govern in our loves
And sway our great designs!
There is my hand.
A sister I bequeath you, whom no brother
Did ever love so dearly: let her live
To join our kingdoms and our hearts
Fly off our loves again!
Happily, amen!
I did not think to draw my sword 'gainst Pompey
For he hath laid strange courtesies and great
Of late upon me: I must thank him only,
Lest my remembrance suffer ill report
At heel of that, defy him.
Time calls upon's:
Of us must Pompey presently be sought,
Or else he seeks out us.
Where lies he?
About the mount Misenum.
What is his strength by land?
Great and increasing: but by sea
He is an absolute master.
So is the fame.
Would we had spoke together! Haste we for it:
Yet, ere we put ourselves in arms, dispatch we
The business we have talk'd of.
With most gladness:
And do invite you to my sister's view,
Whither straight I'll lead you.
Let us, Lepidus,
Not lack your company.
Noble Antony,
Not sickness should detain me.
Flourish. Exeunt OCTAVIUS CAESAR, MARK ANTONY, and LEPIDUS
Welcome from Egypt, sir.
Half the heart of Caesar, worthy Mecaenas! My
honourable friend, Agrippa!
Good Enobarbus!
We have cause to be glad that matters are so well
digested. You stayed well by 't in Egypt.
Ay, sir
made the night light with drinking.
Eight wild-boars roasted whole at a breakfast, and
but twelve persons there
This was but as a fly by an eagle: we had much more
monstrous matter of feast, which worthily deserved noting.
She's a most triumphant lady, if report be square to
her.
When she first met Mark Antony, she pursed up
his heart, upon the river of Cydnus.
There she appeared indeed
well for her.
I will tell you.
The barge she sat in, like a burnish'd throne,
Burn'd on the water: the poop was beaten gold
Purple the sails, and so perfumed that
The winds were love-sick with them
Which to the tune of flutes kept stroke, and made
The water which they beat to follow faster,
As amorous of their strokes. For her own person,
It beggar'd all description: she did lie
In her pavilion--cloth-of-gold of tissue--
O'er-picturing that Venus where we see
The fancy outwork nature: on each side her
Stood pretty dimpled boys, like smiling Cupids,
With divers-colour'd fans, whose wind did seem
To glow the delicate cheeks which they did cool,
And what they undid did.
O, rare for Antony!
Her gentlewomen, like the Nereides,
So many mermaids, tended her i' the eyes,
And made their bends adornings: at the helm
A seeming mermaid steers: the silken tackle
Swell with the touches of those flower-soft hands,
That yarely frame the office. From the barge
A strange invisible perfume hits the sense
Of the adjacent wharfs. The city cast
Her people out upon her
Enthroned i' the market-place, did sit alone,
Whistling to the air
Had gone to gaze on Cleopatra too,
And made a gap in nature.
Rare Egyptian!
Upon her landing, Antony sent to her,
Invited her to supper: she replied,
It should be better he became her guest
Which she entreated: our courteous Antony,
Whom ne'er the word of 'No' woman heard speak,
Being barber'd ten times o'er, goes to the feast,
And for his ordinary pays his heart
For what his eyes eat only.
Royal wench!
She made great Caesar lay his sword to bed:
He plough'd her, and she cropp'd.
I saw her once
Hop forty paces through the public street
And having lost her breath, she spoke, and panted,
That she did make defect perfection,
And, breathless, power breathe forth.
Now Antony must leave her utterly.
Never
Age cannot wither her, nor custom stale
Her infinite variety: other women cloy
The appetites they feed: but she makes hungry
Where most she satisfies
Become themselves in her: that the holy priests
Bless her when she is riggish.
If beauty, wisdom, modesty, can settle
The heart of Antony, Octavia is
A blessed lottery to him.
Let us go.
Good Enobarbus, make yourself my guest
Whilst you abide here.
Humbly, sir, I thank you.
Exeunt
SCENE III. The same. OCTAVIUS CAESAR's house.
Enter MARK ANTONY, OCTAVIUS CAESAR, OCTAVIA between them, and Attendants
The world and my great office will sometimes
Divide me from your bosom.
All which time
Before the gods my knee shall bow my prayers
To them for you.
Good night, sir. My Octavia,
Read not my blemishes in the world's report:
I have not kept my square
Shall all be done by the rule. Good night, dear lady.
Good night, sir.
Good night.
Exeunt OCTAVIUS CAESAR and OCTAVIA
Enter Soothsayer
Now, sirrah
Would I had never come from thence, nor you Thither!
If you can, your reason?
I see it in
My motion, have it not in my tongue: but yet
Hie you to Egypt again.
Say to me,
Whose fortunes shall rise higher, Caesar's or mine?
Caesar's.
Therefore, O Antony, stay not by his side:
Thy demon, that's thy spirit which keeps thee, is
Noble, courageous high, unmatchable,
Where Caesar's is not
Becomes a fear, as being o'erpower'd: therefore
Make space enough between you.
Speak this no more.
To none but thee
If thou dost play with him at any game,
Thou art sure to lose
He beats thee 'gainst the odds: thy lustre thickens,
When he shines by: I say again, thy spirit
Is all afraid to govern thee near him
But, he away, 'tis noble.
Get thee gone:
Say to Ventidius I would speak with him:
Exit Soothsayer
He shall to Parthia. Be it art or hap,
He hath spoken true: the very dice obey him
And in our sports my better cunning faints
Under his chance: if we draw lots, he speeds
His cocks do win the battle still of mine,
When it is all to nought
Beat mine, inhoop'd, at odds. I will to Egypt:
And though I make this marriage for my peace,
I' the east my pleasure lies.
Enter VENTIDIUS
O, come, Ventidius,
You must to Parthia: your commission's ready
Follow me, and receive't.
Exeunt
SCENE IV. The same. A street.
Enter LEPIDUS, MECAENAS, and AGRIPPA
Trouble yourselves no further: pray you, hasten
Your generals after.
Sir, Mark Antony
Will e'en but kiss Octavia, and we'll follow.
Till I shall see you in your soldier's dress,
Which will become you both, farewell.
We shall,
As I conceive the journey, be at the Mount
Before you, Lepidus.
Your way is shorter
My purposes do draw me much about:
You'll win two days upon me.
Sir, good success!
Farewell.
Exeunt
SCENE V. Alexandria. CLEOPATRA's palace.
Enter CLEOPATRA, CHARMIAN, IRAS, and ALEXAS
Give me some music
Of us that trade in love.
The music, ho!
Enter MARDIAN
Let it alone
My arm is sore
As well a woman with an eunuch play'd
As with a woman. Come, you'll play with me, sir?
As well as I can, madam.
And when good will is show'd, though't come
too short,
The actor may plead pardon. I'll none now:
Give me mine angle
My music playing far off, I will betray
Tawny-finn'd fishes
Their slimy jaws
I'll think them every one an Antony,
And say 'Ah, ha! you're caught.'
'Twas merry when
You wager'd on your angling
Did hang a salt-fish on his hook, which he
With fervency drew up.
That time,--O times!--
I laugh'd him out of patience
I laugh'd him into patience
Ere the ninth hour, I drunk him to his bed
Then put my tires and mantles on him, whilst
I wore his sword Philippan.
Enter a Messenger
O, from Italy
Ram thou thy fruitful tidings in mine ears,
That long time have been barren.
Madam, madam,--
Antonius dead!--If thou say so, villain,
Thou kill'st thy mistress: but well and free,
If thou so yield him, there is gold, and here
My bluest veins to kiss
Have lipp'd, and trembled kissing.
First, madam, he is well.
Why, there's more gold.
But, sirrah, mark, we use
To say the dead are well: bring it to that,
The gold I give thee will I melt and pour
Down thy ill-uttering throat.
Good madam, hear me.
Well, go to, I will
But there's no goodness in thy face: if Antony
Be free and healthful,--so tart a favour
To trumpet such good tidings! If not well,
Thou shouldst come like a Fury crown'd with snakes,
Not like a formal man.
Will't please you hear me?
I have a mind to strike thee ere thou speak'st:
Yet if thou say Antony lives, is well,
Or friends with Caesar, or not captive to him,
I'll set thee in a shower of gold, and hail
Rich pearls upon thee.
Madam, he's well.
Well said.
And friends with Caesar.
Thou'rt an honest man.
Caesar and he are greater friends than ever.
Make thee a fortune from me.
But yet, madam,--
I do not like 'But yet,' it does allay
The good precedence
'But yet' is as a gaoler to bring forth
Some monstrous malefactor. Prithee, friend,
Pour out the pack of matter to mine ear,
The good and bad together: he's friends with Caesar:
In state of health thou say'st
Free, madam! no
He's bound unto Octavia.
For what good turn?
For the best turn i' the bed.
I am pale, Charmian.
Madam, he's married to Octavia.
The most infectious pestilence upon thee!
Strikes him down
Good madam, patience.
What say you? Hence,
Strikes him again
Horrible villain! or I'll spurn thine eyes
Like balls before me
She hales him up and down
Thou shalt be whipp'd with wire, and stew'd in brine,
Smarting in lingering pickle.
Gracious madam,
I that do bring the news made not the match.
Say 'tis not so, a province I will give thee,
And make thy fortunes proud: the blow thou hadst
Shall make thy peace for moving me to rage
And I will boot thee with what gift beside
Thy modesty can beg.
He's married, madam.
Rogue, thou hast lived too long.
Draws a knife
Nay, then I'll run.
What mean you, madam? I have made no fault.
Exit
Good madam, keep yourself within yourself:
The man is innocent.
Some innocents 'scape not the thunderbolt.
Melt Egypt into Nile! and kindly creatures
Turn all to serpents! Call the slave again:
Though I am mad, I will not bite him: call.
He is afeard to come.
I will not hurt him.
Exit CHARMIAN
These hands do lack nobility, that they strike
A meaner than myself
Have given myself the cause.
Re-enter CHARMIAN and Messenger
Come hither, sir.
Though it be honest, it is never good
To bring bad news: give to a gracious message.
An host of tongues
Themselves when they be felt.
I have done my duty.
Is he married?
I cannot hate thee worser than I do,
If thou again say 'Yes.'
He's married, madam.
The gods confound thee! dost thou hold there still?
Should I lie, madam?
O, I would thou didst,
So half my Egypt were submerged and made
A cistern for scaled snakes! Go, get thee hence:
Hadst thou Narcissus in thy face, to me
Thou wouldst appear most ugly. He is married?
I crave your highness' pardon.
He is married?
Take no offence that I would not offend you:
To punish me for what you make me do.
Seems much unequal: he's married to Octavia.
O, that his fault should make a knave of thee,
That art not what thou'rt sure of! Get thee hence:
The merchandise which thou hast brought from Rome
Are all too dear for me: lie they upon thy hand,
And be undone by 'em!
Exit Messenger
Good your highness, patience.
In praising Antony, I have dispraised Caesar.
Many times, madam.
I am paid for't now.
Lead me from hence:
I faint: O Iras, Charmian! 'tis no matter.
Go to the fellow, good Alexas
Report the feature of Octavia, her years,
Her inclination, let him not leave out
The colour of her hair: bring me word quickly.
Exit ALEXAS
Let him for ever go:--let him not--Charmian,
Though he be painted one way like a Gorgon,
The other way's a Mars. Bid you Alexas
To MARDIAN
Bring me word how tall she is. Pity me, Charmian,
But do not speak to me. Lead me to my chamber.
Exeunt
SCENE VI. Near Misenum.
Flourish. Enter POMPEY and MENAS at one door,  with drum and trumpet: at another, OCTAVIUS CAESAR,  MARK ANTONY, LEPIDUS, DOMITIUS ENOBARBUS, MECAENAS, with Soldiers marching
Your hostages I have, so have you mine
And we shall talk before we fight.
Most meet
That first we come to words
Our written purposes before us sent
Which, if thou hast consider'd, let us know
If 'twill tie up thy discontented sword,
And carry back to Sicily much tall youth
That else must perish here.
To you all three,
The senators alone of this great world,
Chief factors for the gods, I do not know
Wherefore my father should revengers want,
Having a son and friends
Who at Philippi the good Brutus ghosted,
There saw you labouring for him. What was't
That moved pale Cassius to conspire
Made the all-honour'd, honest Roman, Brutus,
With the arm'd rest, courtiers and beauteous freedom,
To drench the Capitol
Have one man but a man? And that is it
Hath made me rig my navy
The anger'd ocean foams
To scourge the ingratitude that despiteful Rome
Cast on my noble father.
Take your time.
Thou canst not fear us, Pompey, with thy sails
We'll speak with thee at sea: at land, thou know'st
How much we do o'er-count thee.
At land, indeed,
Thou dost o'er-count me of my father's house:
But, since the cuckoo builds not for himself,
Remain in't as thou mayst.
Be pleased to tell us--
For this is from the present--how you take
The offers we have sent you.
There's the point.
Which do not be entreated to, but weigh
What it is worth embraced.
And what may follow,
To try a larger fortune.
You have made me offer
Of Sicily, Sardinia
Rid all the sea of pirates
Measures of wheat to Rome
To part with unhack'd edges, and bear back
Our targes undinted.
That's our offer.
Know, then,
I came before you here a man prepared
To take this offer: but Mark Antony
Put me to some impatience: though I lose
The praise of it by telling, you must know,
When Caesar and your brother were at blows,
Your mother came to Sicily and did find
Her welcome friendly.
I have heard it, Pompey
And am well studied for a liberal thanks
Which I do owe you.
Let me have your hand:
I did not think, sir, to have met you here.
The beds i' the east are soft
That call'd me timelier than my purpose hither
For I have gain'd by 't.
Since I saw you last,
There is a change upon you.
Well, I know not
What counts harsh fortune casts upon my face
But in my bosom shall she never come,
To make my heart her vassal.
Well met here.
I hope so, Lepidus. Thus we are agreed:
I crave our composition may be written,
And seal'd between us.
That's the next to do.
We'll feast each other ere we part
Draw lots who shall begin.
That will I, Pompey.
No, Antony, take the lot: but, first
Or last, your fine Egyptian cookery
Shall have the fame. I have heard that Julius Caesar
Grew fat with feasting there.
You have heard much.
I have fair meanings, sir.
And fair words to them.
Then so much have I heard:
And I have heard, Apollodorus carried--
No more of that: he did so.
What, I pray you?
A certain queen to Caesar in a mattress.
I know thee now: how farest thou, soldier?
Well
And well am like to do
Four feasts are toward.
Let me shake thy hand
I never hated thee: I have seen thee fight,
When I have envied thy behavior.
Sir,
I never loved you much
When you have well deserved ten times as much
As I have said you did.
Enjoy thy plainness,
It nothing ill becomes thee.
Aboard my galley I invite you all:
Will you lead, lords?
Show us the way, sir.
Come.
Exeunt all but MENAS and ENOBARBUS
[Aside]  Thy father, Pompey, would ne'er have
made this treaty.--You and I have known, sir.
At sea, I think.
We have, sir.
You have done well by water.
And you by land.
I will praise any man that will praise me
cannot be denied what I have done by land.
Nor what I have done by water.
Yes, something you can deny for your own
safety: you have been a great thief by sea.
And you by land.
There I deny my land service. But give me your
hand, Menas: if our eyes had authority, here they
might take two thieves kissing.
All men's faces are true, whatsome'er their hands are.
But there is never a fair woman has a true face.
No slander
We came hither to fight with you.
For my part, I am sorry it is turned to a drinking.
Pompey doth this day laugh away his fortune.
If he do, sure, he cannot weep't back again.
You've said, sir. We looked not for Mark Antony
here: pray you, is he married to Cleopatra?
Caesar's sister is called Octavia.
True, sir
But she is now the wife of Marcus Antonius.
Pray ye, sir?
'Tis true.
Then is Caesar and he for ever knit together.
If I were bound to divine of this unity, I would
not prophesy so.
I think the policy of that purpose made more in the
marriage than the love of the parties.
I think so too. But you shall find, the band that
seems to tie their friendship together will be the
very strangler of their amity: Octavia is of a
holy, cold, and still conversation.
Who would not have his wife so?
Not he that himself is not so
He will to his Egyptian dish again: then shall the
sighs of Octavia blow the fire up in Caesar
I said before, that which is the strength of their
amity shall prove the immediate author of their
variance. Antony will use his affection where it is:
he married but his occasion here.
And thus it may be. Come, sir, will you aboard?
I have a health for you.
I shall take it, sir: we have used our throats in Egypt.
Come, let's away.
Exeunt
SCENE VII. On board POMPEY's galley, off Misenum.
Music plays. Enter two or three Servants with a banquet
Here they'll be, man. Some o' their plants are
ill-rooted already: the least wind i' the world
will blow them down.
Lepidus is high-coloured.
They have made him drink alms-drink.
As they pinch one another by the disposition, he
cries out 'No more
entreaty, and himself to the drink.
But it raises the greater war between him and
his discretion.
Why, this is to have a name in great men's
fellowship: I had as lief have a reed that will do
me no service as a partisan I could not heave.
To be called into a huge sphere, and not to be seen
to move in't, are the holes where eyes should be,
which pitifully disaster the cheeks.
A sennet sounded. Enter OCTAVIUS CAESAR, MARK  ANTONY, LEPIDUS, POMPEY, AGRIPPA, MECAENAS, DOMITIUS ENOBARBUS, MENAS, with other captains
[To OCTAVIUS CAESAR]  Thus do they, sir: they take
the flow o' the Nile
By certain scales i' the pyramid
By the height, the lowness, or the mean, if dearth
Or foison follow: the higher Nilus swells,
The more it promises: as it ebbs, the seedsman
Upon the slime and ooze scatters his grain,
And shortly comes to harvest.
You've strange serpents there.
Ay, Lepidus.
Your serpent of Egypt is bred now of your mud by the
operation of your sun: so is your crocodile.
They are so.
Sit,--and some wine! A health to Lepidus!
I am not so well as I should be, but I'll ne'er out.
Not till you have slept
Nay, certainly, I have heard the Ptolemies'
pyramises are very goodly things
contradiction, I have heard that.
[Aside to POMPEY]  Pompey, a word.
[Aside to MENAS]                 Say in mine ear:
what is't?
[Aside to POMPEY]  Forsake thy seat, I do beseech
thee, captain,
And hear me speak a word.
[Aside to MENAS]  Forbear me till anon.
This wine for Lepidus!
What manner o' thing is your crocodile?
It is shaped, sir, like itself
as it hath breadth: it is just so high as it is,
and moves with its own organs: it lives by that
which nourisheth it
it, it transmigrates.
What colour is it of?
Of it own colour too.
'Tis a strange serpent.
'Tis so. And the tears of it are wet.
Will this description satisfy him?
With the health that Pompey gives him, else he is a
very epicure.
[Aside to MENAS]  Go hang, sir, hang! Tell me of
that? away!
Do as I bid you. Where's this cup I call'd for?
[Aside to POMPEY]  If for the sake of merit thou
wilt hear me,
Rise from thy stool.
[Aside to MENAS]  I think thou'rt mad.
The matter?
Rises, and walks aside
I have ever held my cap off to thy fortunes.
Thou hast served me with much faith. What's else to say?
Be jolly, lords.
These quick-sands, Lepidus,
Keep off them, for you sink.
Wilt thou be lord of all the world?
What say'st thou?
Wilt thou be lord of the whole world? That's twice.
How should that be?
But entertain it,
And, though thou think me poor, I am the man
Will give thee all the world.
Hast thou drunk well?
Now, Pompey, I have kept me from the cup.
Thou art, if thou darest be, the earthly Jove:
Whate'er the ocean pales, or sky inclips,
Is thine, if thou wilt ha't.
Show me which way.
These three world-sharers, these competitors,
Are in thy vessel: let me cut the cable
And, when we are put off, fall to their throats:
All there is thine.
Ah, this thou shouldst have done,
And not have spoke on't! In me 'tis villany
In thee't had been good service. Thou must know,
'Tis not my profit that does lead mine honour
Mine honour, it. Repent that e'er thy tongue
Hath so betray'd thine act: being done unknown,
I should have found it afterwards well done
But must condemn it now. Desist, and drink.
[Aside]  For this,
I'll never follow thy pall'd fortunes more.
Who seeks, and will not take when once 'tis offer'd,
Shall never find it more.
This health to Lepidus!
Bear him ashore. I'll pledge it for him, Pompey.
Here's to thee, Menas!
Enobarbus, welcome!
Fill till the cup be hid.
There's a strong fellow, Menas.
Pointing to the Attendant who carries off LEPIDUS
Why?
A' bears the third part of the world, man
not?
The third part, then, is drunk: would it were all,
That it might go on wheels!
Drink thou
Come.
This is not yet an Alexandrian feast.
It ripens towards it. Strike the vessels, ho?
Here is to Caesar!
I could well forbear't.
It's monstrous labour, when I wash my brain,
And it grows fouler.
Be a child o' the time.
Possess it, I'll make answer:
But I had rather fast from all four days
Than drink so much in one.
Ha, my brave emperor!
To MARK ANTONY
Shall we dance now the Egyptian Bacchanals,
And celebrate our drink?
Let's ha't, good soldier.
Come, let's all take hands,
Till that the conquering wine hath steep'd our sense
In soft and delicate Lethe.
All take hands.
Make battery to our ears with the loud music:
The while I'll place you: then the boy shall sing
The holding every man shall bear as loud
As his strong sides can volley.
Music plays. DOMITIUS ENOBARBUS places them hand in hand
THE SONG.
Come, thou monarch of the vine,
Plumpy Bacchus with pink eyne!
In thy fats our cares be drown'd,
With thy grapes our hairs be crown'd:
Cup us, till the world go round,
Cup us, till the world go round!
What would you more? Pompey, good night. Good brother,
Let me request you off: our graver business
Frowns at this levity. Gentle lords, let's part
You see we have burnt our cheeks: strong Enobarb
Is weaker than the wine
Splits what it speaks: the wild disguise hath almost
Antick'd us all. What needs more words? Good night.
Good Antony, your hand.
I'll try you on the shore.
And shall, sir
O Antony,
You have my father's house,--But, what? we are friends.
Come, down into the boat.
Take heed you fall not.
Exeunt all but DOMITIUS ENOBARBUS and MENAS
Menas, I'll not on shore.
No, to my cabin.
These drums! these trumpets, flutes! what!
Let Neptune hear we bid a loud farewell
To these great fellows: sound and be hang'd, sound out!
Sound a flourish, with drums
Ho! says a' There's my cap.
Ho! Noble captain, come.
Exeunt
ACT III
SCENE I. A plain in Syria.
Enter VENTIDIUS as it were in triumph, with SILIUS,  and other Romans, Officers, and Soldiers
Now, darting Parthia, art thou struck
Pleased fortune does of Marcus Crassus' death
Make me revenger. Bear the king's son's body
Before our army. Thy Pacorus, Orodes,
Pays this for Marcus Crassus.
Noble Ventidius,
Whilst yet with Parthian blood thy sword is warm,
The fugitive Parthians follow
Mesopotamia, and the shelters whither
The routed fly: so thy grand captain Antony
Shall set thee on triumphant chariots and
Put garlands on thy head.
O Silius, Silius,
I have done enough
May make too great an act: for learn this, Silius
Better to leave undone, than by our deed
Acquire too high a fame when him we serve's away.
Caesar and Antony have ever won
More in their officer than person: Sossius,
One of my place in Syria, his lieutenant,
For quick accumulation of renown,
Which he achieved by the minute, lost his favour.
Who does i' the wars more than his captain can
Becomes his captain's captain: and ambition,
The soldier's virtue, rather makes choice of loss,
Than gain which darkens him.
I could do more to do Antonius good,
But 'twould offend him
Should my performance perish.
Thou hast, Ventidius,
that
Without the which a soldier, and his sword,
Grants scarce distinction. Thou wilt write to Antony!
I'll humbly signify what in his name,
That magical word of war, we have effected
How, with his banners and his well-paid ranks,
The ne'er-yet-beaten horse of Parthia
We have jaded out o' the field.
Where is he now?
He purposeth to Athens: whither, with what haste
The weight we must convey with's will permit,
We shall appear before him. On there
Exeunt
SCENE II. Rome. An ante-chamber in OCTAVIUS CAESAR's house.
Enter AGRIPPA at one door, DOMITIUS ENOBARBUS at another
What, are the brothers parted?
They have dispatch'd with Pompey, he is gone
The other three are sealing. Octavia weeps
To part from Rome
Since Pompey's feast, as Menas says, is troubled
With the green sickness.
'Tis a noble Lepidus.
A very fine one: O, how he loves Caesar!
Nay, but how dearly he adores Mark Antony!
Caesar? Why, he's the Jupiter of men.
What's Antony? The god of Jupiter.
Spake you of Caesar? How! the non-pareil!
O Antony! O thou Arabian bird!
Would you praise Caesar, say 'Caesar:' go no further.
Indeed, he plied them both with excellent praises.
But he loves Caesar best
Ho! hearts, tongues, figures, scribes, bards,
poets, cannot
Think, speak, cast, write, sing, number, ho!
His love to Antony. But as for Caesar,
Kneel down, kneel down, and wonder.
Both he loves.
They are his shards, and he their beetle.
Trumpets within
So
This is to horse. Adieu, noble Agrippa.
Good fortune, worthy soldier
Enter OCTAVIUS CAESAR, MARK ANTONY, LEPIDUS, and OCTAVIA
No further, sir.
You take from me a great part of myself
Use me well in 't. Sister, prove such a wife
As my thoughts make thee, and as my farthest band
Shall pass on thy approof. Most noble Antony,
Let not the piece of virtue, which is set
Betwixt us as the cement of our love,
To keep it builded, be the ram to batter
The fortress of it
Have loved without this mean, if on both parts
This be not cherish'd.
Make me not offended
In your distrust.
I have said.
You shall not find,
Though you be therein curious, the least cause
For what you seem to fear: so, the gods keep you,
And make the hearts of Romans serve your ends!
We will here part.
Farewell, my dearest sister, fare thee well:
The elements be kind to thee, and make
Thy spirits all of comfort! fare thee well.
My noble brother!
The April 's in her eyes: it is love's spring,
And these the showers to bring it on. Be cheerful.
Sir, look well to my husband's house
What, Octavia?
I'll tell you in your ear.
Her tongue will not obey her heart, nor can
Her heart inform her tongue,--the swan's
down-feather,
That stands upon the swell at full of tide,
And neither way inclines.
[Aside to AGRIPPA]  Will Caesar weep?
[Aside to DOMITIUS ENOBARBUS]  He has a cloud in 's face.
[Aside to AGRIPPA]  He were the worse for that,
were he a horse
So is he, being a man.
[Aside to DOMITIUS ENOBARBUS]  Why, Enobarbus,
When Antony found Julius Caesar dead,
He cried almost to roaring
When at Philippi he found Brutus slain.
[Aside to AGRIPPA]  That year, indeed, he was
troubled with a rheum
What willingly he did confound he wail'd,
Believe't, till I wept too.
No, sweet Octavia,
You shall hear from me still
Out-go my thinking on you.
Come, sir, come
I'll wrestle with you in my strength of love:
Look, here I have you
And give you to the gods.
Adieu
Let all the number of the stars give light
To thy fair way!
Farewell, fa rewell!
Kisses OCTAVIA
Farewell!
Trumpets sound. Exeunt
SCENE III. Alexandria. CLEOPATRA's palace.
Enter CLEOPATRA, CHARMIAN, IRAS, and ALEXAS
Where is the fellow?
Half afeard to come.
Go to, go to.
Enter the Messenger as before
Come hither, sir.
Good majesty,
Herod of Jewry dare not look upon you
But when you are well pleased.
That Herod's head
I'll have: but how, when Antony is gone
Through whom I might command it? Come thou near.
Most gracious majesty,--
Didst thou behold Octavia?
Ay, dread queen.
Where?
Madam, in Rome
I look'd her in the face, and saw her led
Between her brother and Mark Antony.
Is she as tall as me?
She is not, madam.
Didst hear her speak? is she shrill-tongued or low?
Madam, I heard her speak
That's not so good: he cannot like her long.
Like her! O Isis! 'tis impossible.
I think so, Charmian: dull of tongue, and dwarfish!
What majesty is in her gait? Remember,
If e'er thou look'dst on majesty.
She creeps:
Her motion and her station are as one
She shows a body rather than a life,
A statue than a breather.
Is this certain?
Or I have no observance.
Three in Egypt
Cannot make better note.
He's very knowing
I do perceive't: there's nothing in her yet:
The fellow has good judgment.
Excellent.
Guess at her years, I prithee.
Madam,
She was a widow,--
Widow! Charmian, hark.
And I do think she's thirty.
Bear'st thou her face in mind? is't long or round?
Round even to faultiness.
For the most part, too, they are foolish that are so.
Her hair, what colour?
Brown, madam: and her forehead
As low as she would wish it.
There's gold for thee.
Thou must not take my former sharpness ill:
I will employ thee back again
Most fit for business: go make thee ready
Our letters are prepared.
Exit Messenger
A proper man.
Indeed, he is so: I repent me much
That so I harried him. Why, methinks, by him,
This creature's no such thing.
Nothing, madam.
The man hath seen some majesty, and should know.
Hath he seen majesty? Isis else defend,
And serving you so long!
I have one thing more to ask him yet, good Charmian:
But 'tis no matter
Where I will write. All may be well enough.
I warrant you, madam.
Exeunt
SCENE IV. Athens. A room in MARK ANTONY's house.
Enter MARK ANTONY and OCTAVIA
Nay, nay, Octavia, not only that,--
That were excusable, that, and thousands more
Of semblable import,--but he hath waged
New wars 'gainst Pompey
To public ear:
Spoke scantly of me: when perforce he could not
But pay me terms of honour, cold and sickly
He vented them
When the best hint was given him, he not took't,
Or did it from his teeth.
O my good lord,
Believe not all
Stomach not all. A more unhappy lady,
If this division chance, ne'er stood between,
Praying for both parts:
The good gods me presently,
When I shall pray, 'O bless my lord and husband!'
Undo that prayer, by crying out as loud,
'O, bless my brother!' Husband win, win brother,
Prays, and destroys the prayer
'Twixt these extremes at all.
Gentle Octavia,
Let your best love draw to that point, which seeks
Best to preserve it: if I lose mine honour,
I lose myself: better I were not yours
Than yours so branchless. But, as you requested,
Yourself shall go between 's: the mean time, lady,
I'll raise the preparation of a war
Shall stain your brother: make your soonest haste
So your desires are yours.
Thanks to my lord.
The Jove of power make me most weak, most weak,
Your reconciler! Wars 'twixt you twain would be
As if the world should cleave, and that slain men
Should solder up the rift.
When it appears to you where this begins,
Turn your displeasure that way: for our faults
Can never be so equal, that your love
Can equally move with them. Provide your going
Choose your own company, and command what cost
Your heart has mind to.
Exeunt
SCENE V. The same. Another room.
Enter DOMITIUS ENOBARBUS and EROS, meeting
How now, friend Eros!
There's strange news come, sir.
What, man?
Caesar and Lepidus have made wars upon Pompey.
This is old: what is the success?
Caesar, having made use of him in the wars 'gainst
Pompey, presently denied him rivality
him partake in the glory of the action: and not
resting here, accuses him of letters he had formerly
wrote to Pompey
the poor third is up, till death enlarge his confine.
Then, world, thou hast a pair of chaps, no more
And throw between them all the food thou hast,
They'll grind the one the other. Where's Antony?
He's walking in the garden--thus
The rush that lies before him
And threats the throat of that his officer
That murder'd Pompey.
Our great navy's rigg'd.
For Italy and Caesar. More, Domitius
My lord desires you presently: my news
I might have told hereafter.
'Twill be naught:
But let it be. Bring me to Antony.
Come, sir.
Exeunt
SCENE VI. Rome. OCTAVIUS CAESAR's house.
Enter OCTAVIUS CAESAR, AGRIPPA, and MECAENAS
Contemning Rome, he has done all this, and more,
In Alexandria: here's the manner of 't:
I' the market-place, on a tribunal silver'd,
Cleopatra and himself in chairs of gold
Were publicly enthroned: at the feet sat
Caesarion, whom they call my father's son,
And all the unlawful issue that their lust
Since then hath made between them. Unto her
He gave the stablishment of Egypt
Of lower Syria, Cyprus, Lydia,
Absolute queen.
This in the public eye?
I' the common show-place, where they exercise.
His sons he there proclaim'd the kings of kings:
Great Media, Parthia, and Armenia.
He gave to Alexander
Syria, Cilicia, and Phoenicia: she
In the habiliments of the goddess Isis
That day appear'd
As 'tis reported, so.
Let Rome be thus Inform'd.
Who, queasy with his insolence
Already, will their good thoughts call from him.
The people know it
His accusations.
Who does he accuse?
Caesar: and that, having in Sicily
Sextus Pompeius spoil'd, we had not rated him
His part o' the isle: then does he say, he lent me
Some shipping unrestored: lastly, he frets
That Lepidus of the triumvirate
Should be deposed
All his revenue.
Sir, this should be answer'd.
'Tis done already, and the messenger gone.
I have told him, Lepidus was grown too cruel
That he his high authority abused,
And did deserve his change: for what I have conquer'd,
I grant him part
And other of his conquer'd kingdoms, I
Demand the like.
He'll never yield to that.
Nor must not then be yielded to in this.
Enter OCTAVIA with her train
Hail, Caesar, and my lord! hail, most dear Caesar!
That ever I should call thee castaway!
You have not call'd me so, nor have you cause.
Why have you stol'n upon us thus! You come not
Like Caesar's sister: the wife of Antony
Should have an army for an usher, and
The neighs of horse to tell of her approach
Long ere she did appear
Should have borne men
Longing for what it had not
Should have ascended to the roof of heaven,
Raised by your populous troops: but you are come
A market-maid to Rome
The ostentation of our love, which, left unshown,
Is often left unloved
By sea and land
With an augmented greeting.
Good my lord,
To come thus was I not constrain'd, but did
On my free will. My lord, Mark Antony,
Hearing that you prepared for war, acquainted
My grieved ear withal
His pardon for return.
Which soon he granted,
Being an obstruct 'tween his lust and him.
Do not say so, my lord.
I have eyes upon him,
And his affairs come to me on the wind.
Where is he now?
My lord, in Athens.
No, my most wronged sister
Hath nodded him to her. He hath given his empire
Up to a whore
The kings o' the earth for war
Bocchus, the king of Libya
Of Cappadocia
Of Paphlagonia
King Malchus of Arabia
Herod of Jewry
Of Comagene
The kings of Mede and Lycaonia,
With a more larger list of sceptres.
Ay me, most wretched,
That have my heart parted betwixt two friends
That do afflict each other!
Welcome hither:
Your letters did withhold our breaking forth
Till we perceived, both how you were wrong led,
And we in negligent danger. Cheer your heart
Be you not troubled with the time, which drives
O'er your content these strong necessities
But let determined things to destiny
Hold unbewail'd their way. Welcome to Rome
Nothing more dear to me. You are abused
Beyond the mark of thought: and the high gods,
To do you justice, make them ministers
Of us and those that love you. Best of comfort
And ever welcome to us.
Welcome, lady.
Welcome, dear madam.
Each heart in Rome does love and pity you:
Only the adulterous Antony, most large
In his abominations, turns you off
And gives his potent regiment to a trull,
That noises it against us.
Is it so, sir?
Most certain. Sister, welcome: pray you,
Be ever known to patience: my dear'st sister!
Exeunt
SCENE VII. Near Actium. MARK ANTONY's camp.
Enter CLEOPATRA and DOMITIUS ENOBARBUS
I will be even with thee, doubt it not.
But why, why, why?
Thou hast forspoke my being in these wars,
And say'st it is not fit.
Well, is it, is it?
If not denounced against us, why should not we
Be there in person?
[Aside]  Well, I could reply:
If we should serve with horse and mares together,
The horse were merely lost
A soldier and his horse.
What is't you say?
Your presence needs must puzzle Antony
Take from his heart, take from his brain,
from's time,
What should not then be spared. He is already
Traduced for levity
That Photinus an eunuch and your maids
Manage this war.
Sink Rome, and their tongues rot
That speak against us! A charge we bear i' the war,
And, as the president of my kingdom, will
Appear there for a man. Speak not against it:
I will not stay behind.
Nay, I have done.
Here comes the emperor.
Enter MARK ANTONY and CANIDIUS
Is it not strange, Canidius,
That from Tarentum and Brundusium
He could so quickly cut the Ionian sea,
And take in Toryne? You have heard on't, sweet?
Celerity is never more admired
Than by the negligent.
A good rebuke,
Which might have well becomed the best of men,
To taunt at slackness. Canidius, we
Will fight with him by sea.
By sea! what else?
Why will my lord do so?
For that he dares us to't.
So hath my lord dared him to single fight.
Ay, and to wage this battle at Pharsalia.
Where Caesar fought with Pompey: but these offers,
Which serve not for his vantage, be shakes off
And so should you.
Your ships are not well mann'd
Your mariners are muleters, reapers, people
Ingross'd by swift impress
Are those that often have 'gainst Pompey fought:
Their ships are yare
Shall fall you for refusing him at sea,
Being prepared for land.
By sea, by sea.
Most worthy sir, you therein throw away
The absolute soldiership you have by land
Distract your army, which doth most consist
Of war-mark'd footmen
Your own renowned knowledge
The way which promises assurance
Give up yourself merely to chance and hazard,
From firm security.
I'll fight at sea.
I have sixty sails, Caesar none better.
Our overplus of shipping will we burn
And, with the rest full-mann'd, from the head of Actium
Beat the approaching Caesar. But if we fail,
We then can do't at land.
Enter a Messenger
Thy business?
The news is true, my lord
Caesar has taken Toryne.
Can he be there in person? 'tis impossible
Strange that power should be. Canidius,
Our nineteen legions thou shalt hold by land,
And our twelve thousand horse. We'll to our ship:
Away, my Thetis!
Enter a Soldier
How now, worthy soldier?
O noble emperor, do not fight by sea
Trust not to rotten planks: do you misdoubt
This sword and these my wounds? Let the Egyptians
And the Phoenicians go a-ducking
Have used to conquer, standing on the earth,
And fighting foot to foot.
Well, well: away!
Exeunt MARK ANTONY, QUEEN CLEOPATRA, and DOMITIUS ENOBARBUS
By Hercules, I think I am i' the right.
Soldier, thou art: but his whole action grows
Not in the power on't: so our leader's led,
And we are women's men.
You keep by land
The legions and the horse whole, do you not?
Marcus Octavius, Marcus Justeius,
Publicola, and Caelius, are for sea:
But we keep whole by land. This speed of Caesar's
Carries beyond belief.
While he was yet in Rome,
His power went out in such distractions as
Beguiled all spies.
Who's his lieutenant, hear you?
They say, one Taurus.
Well I know the man.
Enter a Messenger
The emperor calls Canidius.
With news the time's with labour, and throes forth,
Each minute, some.
Exeunt
SCENE VIII. A plain near Actium.
Enter OCTAVIUS CAESAR, and TAURUS, with his army, marching
Taurus!
My lord?
Strike not by land
Till we have done at sea. Do not exceed
The prescript of this scroll: our fortune lies
Upon this jump.
Exeunt
SCENE IX. Another part of the plain.
Enter MARK ANTONY and DOMITIUS ENOBARBUS
Set we our squadrons on yond side o' the hill,
In eye of Caesar's battle
We may the number of the ships behold,
And so proceed accordingly.
Exeunt
SCENE X. Another part of the plain.
CANIDIUS marcheth with his land army one way over  the stage
Alarum. Enter DOMITIUS ENOBARBUS
Naught, naught all, naught! I can behold no longer:
The Antoniad, the Egyptian admiral,
With all their sixty, fly and turn the rudder:
To see't mine eyes are blasted.
Enter SCARUS
Gods and goddesses,
All the whole synod of them!
What's thy passion!
The greater cantle of the world is lost
With very ignorance
Kingdoms and provinces.
How appears the fight?
On our side like the token'd pestilence,
Where death is sure. Yon ribaudred nag of Egypt,--
Whom leprosy o'ertake!--i' the midst o' the fight,
When vantage like a pair of twins appear'd,
Both as the same, or rather ours the elder,
The breese upon her, like a cow in June,
Hoists sails and flies.
That I beheld:
Mine eyes did sicken at the sight, and could not
Endure a further view.
She once being loof'd,
The noble ruin of her magic, Antony,
Claps on his sea-wing, and, like a doting mallard,
Leaving the fight in height, flies after her:
I never saw an action of such shame
Experience, manhood, honour, ne'er before
Did violate so itself.
Alack, alack!
Enter CANIDIUS
Our fortune on the sea is out of breath,
And sinks most lamentably. Had our general
Been what he knew himself, it had gone well:
O, he has given example for our flight,
Most grossly, by his own!
Ay, are you thereabouts?
Why, then, good night indeed.
Toward Peloponnesus are they fled.
'Tis easy to't
What further comes.
To Caesar will I render
My legions and my horse: six kings already
Show me the way of yielding.
I'll yet follow
The wounded chance of Antony, though my reason
Sits in the wind against me.
Exeunt
SCENE XI. Alexandria. CLEOPATRA's palace.
Enter MARK ANTONY with Attendants
Hark! the land bids me tread no more upon't
It is ashamed to bear me! Friends, come hither:
I am so lated in the world, that I
Have lost my way for ever: I have a ship
Laden with gold
And make your peace with Caesar.
Fly! not we.
I have fled myself
To run and show their shoulders. Friends, be gone
I have myself resolved upon a course
Which has no need of you
My treasure's in the harbour, take it. O,
I follow'd that I blush to look upon:
My very hairs do mutiny
Reprove the brown for rashness, and they them
For fear and doting. Friends, be gone: you shall
Have letters from me to some friends that will
Sweep your way for you. Pray you, look not sad,
Nor make replies of loathness: take the hint
Which my despair proclaims
Which leaves itself: to the sea-side straightway:
I will possess you of that ship and treasure.
Leave me, I pray, a little: pray you now:
Nay, do so
Therefore I pray you: I'll see you by and by.
Sits down
Enter CLEOPATRA led by CHARMIAN and IRAS
Nay, gentle madam, to him, comfort him.
Do, most dear queen.
Do! why: what else?
Let me sit down. O Juno!
No, no, no, no, no.
See you here, sir?
O fie, fie, fie!
Madam!
Madam, O good empress!
Sir, sir,--
Yes, my lord, yes
His sword e'en like a dancer
The lean and wrinkled Cassius
That the mad Brutus ended: he alone
Dealt on lieutenantry, and no practise had
In the brave squares of war: yet now--No matter.
Ah, stand by.
The queen, my lord, the queen.
Go to him, madam, speak to him:
He is unqualitied with very shame.
Well then, sustain him: O!
Most noble sir, arise
Her head's declined, and death will seize her, but
Your comfort makes the rescue.
I have offended reputation,
A most unnoble swerving.
Sir, the queen.
O, whither hast thou led me, Egypt? See,
How I convey my shame out of thine eyes
By looking back what I have left behind
'Stroy'd in dishonour.
O my lord, my lord,
Forgive my fearful sails! I little thought
You would have follow'd.
Egypt, thou knew'st too well
My heart was to thy rudder tied by the strings,
And thou shouldst tow me after: o'er my spirit
Thy full supremacy thou knew'st, and that
Thy beck might from the bidding of the gods
Command me.
O, my pardon!
Now I must
To the young man send humble treaties, dodge
And palter in the shifts of lowness
With half the bulk o' the world play'd as I pleased,
Making and marring fortunes. You did know
How much you were my conqueror
My sword, made weak by my affection, would
Obey it on all cause.
Pardon, pardon!
Fall not a tear, I say
All that is won and lost: give me a kiss
Even this repays me. We sent our schoolmaster
Is he come back? Love, I am full of lead.
Some wine, within there, and our viands! Fortune knows
We scorn her most when most she offers blows.
Exeunt
SCENE XII. Egypt. OCTAVIUS CAESAR's camp.
Enter OCTAVIUS CAESAR, DOLABELLA, THYREUS, with others
Let him appear that's come from Antony.
Know you him?
Caesar, 'tis his schoolmaster:
An argument that he is pluck'd, when hither
He sends so poor a pinion off his wing,
Which had superfluous kings for messengers
Not many moons gone by.
Enter EUPHRONIUS, ambassador from MARK ANTONY
Approach, and speak.
Such as I am, I come from Antony:
I was of late as petty to his ends
As is the morn-dew on the myrtle-leaf
To his grand sea.
Be't so: declare thine office.
Lord of his fortunes he salutes thee, and
Requires to live in Egypt: which not granted,
He lessens his requests
To let him breathe between the heavens and earth,
A private man in Athens: this for him.
Next, Cleopatra does confess thy greatness
Submits her to thy might
The circle of the Ptolemies for her heirs,
Now hazarded to thy grace.
For Antony,
I have no ears to his request. The queen
Of audience nor desire shall fail, so she
From Egypt drive her all-disgraced friend,
Or take his life there: this if she perform,
She shall not sue unheard. So to them both.
Fortune pursue thee!
Bring him through the bands.
Exit EUPHRONIUS
To THYREUS
From Antony win Cleopatra: promise,
And in our name, what she requires
From thine invention, offers: women are not
In their best fortunes strong
The ne'er touch'd vestal: try thy cunning, Thyreus
Make thine own edict for thy pains, which we
Will answer as a law.
Caesar, I go.
Observe how Antony becomes his flaw,
And what thou think'st his very action speaks
In every power that moves.
Caesar, I shall.
Exeunt
SCENE XIII. Alexandria. CLEOPATRA's palace.
Enter CLEOPATRA, DOMITIUS ENOBARBUS, CHARMIAN, and IRAS
What shall we do, Enobarbus?
Think, and die.
Is Antony or we in fault for this?
Antony only, that would make his will
Lord of his reason. What though you fled
From that great face of war, whose several ranges
Frighted each other? why should he follow?
The itch of his affection should not then
Have nick'd his captainship
When half to half the world opposed, he being
The meered question: 'twas a shame no less
Than was his loss, to course your flying flags,
And leave his navy gazing.
Prithee, peace.
Enter MARK ANTONY with EUPHRONIUS, the Ambassador
Is that his answer?
Ay, my lord.
The queen shall then have courtesy, so she
Will yield us up.
He says so.
Let her know't.
To the boy Caesar send this grizzled head,
And he will fill thy wishes to the brim
With principalities.
That head, my lord?
To him again: tell him he wears the rose
Of youth upon him
Something particular: his coin, ships, legions,
May be a coward's
Under the service of a child as soon
As i' the command of Caesar: I dare him therefore
To lay his gay comparisons apart,
And answer me declined, sword against sword,
Ourselves alone. I'll write it: follow me.
Exeunt MARK ANTONY and EUPHRONIUS
[Aside]  Yes, like enough, high-battled Caesar will
Unstate his happiness, and be staged to the show,
Against a sworder! I see men's judgments are
A parcel of their fortunes
Do draw the inward quality after them,
To suffer all alike. That he should dream,
Knowing all measures, the full Caesar will
Answer his emptiness! Caesar, thou hast subdued
His judgment too.
Enter an Attendant
A messenger from CAESAR.
What, no more ceremony? See, my women!
Against the blown rose may they stop their nose
That kneel'd unto the buds. Admit him, sir.
Exit Attendant
[Aside]  Mine honesty and I begin to square.
The loyalty well held to fools does make
Our faith mere folly: yet he that can endure
To follow with allegiance a fall'n lord
Does conquer him that did his master conquer
And earns a place i' the story.
Enter THYREUS
Caesar's will?
Hear it apart.
None but friends: say boldly.
So, haply, are they friends to Antony.
He needs as many, sir, as Caesar has
Or needs not us. If Caesar please, our master
Will leap to be his friend: for us, you know,
Whose he is we are, and that is, Caesar's.
So.
Thus then, thou most renown'd: Caesar entreats,
Not to consider in what case thou stand'st,
Further than he is Caesar.
Go on: right royal.
He knows that you embrace not Antony
As you did love, but as you fear'd him.
O!
The scars upon your honour, therefore, he
Does pity, as constrained blemishes,
Not as deserved.
He is a god, and knows
What is most right: mine honour was not yielded,
But conquer'd merely.
[Aside]             To be sure of that,
I will ask Antony. Sir, sir, thou art so leaky,
That we must leave thee to thy sinking, for
Thy dearest quit thee.
Exit
Shall I say to Caesar
What you require of him? for he partly begs
To be desired to give. It much would please him,
That of his fortunes you should make a staff
To lean upon: but it would warm his spirits,
To hear from me you had left Antony,
And put yourself under his shrowd,
The universal landlord.
What's your name?
My name is Thyreus.
Most kind messenger,
Say to great Caesar this: in deputation
I kiss his conquering hand: tell him, I am prompt
To lay my crown at 's feet, and there to kneel:
Tell him from his all-obeying breath I hear
The doom of Egypt.
'Tis your noblest course.
Wisdom and fortune combating together,
If that the former dare but what it can,
No chance may shake it. Give me grace to lay
My duty on your hand.
Your Caesar's father oft,
When he hath mused of taking kingdoms in,
Bestow'd his lips on that unworthy place,
As it rain'd kisses.
Re-enter MARK ANTONY and DOMITIUS ENOBARBUS
Favours, by Jove that thunders!
What art thou, fellow?
One that but performs
The bidding of the fullest man, and worthiest
To have command obey'd.
[Aside]               You will be whipp'd.
Approach, there! Ah, you kite! Now, gods
and devils!
Authority melts from me: of late, when I cried 'Ho!'
Like boys unto a muss, kings would start forth,
And cry 'Your will?' Have you no ears? I am
Antony yet.
Enter Attendants
Take hence this Jack, and whip him.
[Aside]  'Tis better playing with a lion's whelp
Than with an old one dying.
Moon and stars!
Whip him. Were't twenty of the greatest tributaries
That do acknowledge Caesar, should I find them
So saucy with the hand of she here,--what's her name,
Since she was Cleopatra? Whip him, fellows,
Till, like a boy, you see him cringe his face,
And whine aloud for mercy: take him hence.
Mark Antony!
Tug him away: being whipp'd,
Bring him again: this Jack of Caesar's shall
Bear us an errand to him.
Exeunt Attendants with THYREUS
You were half blasted ere I knew you: ha!
Have I my pillow left unpress'd in Rome,
Forborne the getting of a lawful race,
And by a gem of women, to be abused
By one that looks on feeders?
Good my lord,--
You have been a boggler ever:
But when we in our viciousness grow hard--
O misery on't!--the wise gods seel our eyes
In our own filth drop our clear judgments
Adore our errors
To our confusion.
O, is't come to this?
I found you as a morsel cold upon
Dead Caesar's trencher
Of Cneius Pompey's
Unregister'd in vulgar fame, you have
Luxuriously pick'd out: for, I am sure,
Though you can guess what temperance should be,
You know not what it is.
Wherefore is this?
To let a fellow that will take rewards
And say 'God quit you!' be familiar with
My playfellow, your hand
And plighter of high hearts! O, that I were
Upon the hill of Basan, to outroar
The horned herd! for I have savage cause
And to proclaim it civilly, were like
A halter'd neck which does the hangman thank
For being yare about him.
Re-enter Attendants with THYREUS
Is he whipp'd?
Soundly, my lord.
Cried he? and begg'd a' pardon?
He did ask favour.
If that thy father live, let him repent
Thou wast not made his daughter
To follow Caesar in his triumph, since
Thou hast been whipp'd for following him: henceforth
The white hand of a lady fever thee,
Shake thou to look on 't. Get thee back to Caesar,
Tell him thy entertainment: look, thou say
He makes me angry with him
Proud and disdainful, harping on what I am,
Not what he knew I was: he makes me angry
And at this time most easy 'tis to do't,
When my good stars, that were my former guides,
Have empty left their orbs, and shot their fires
Into the abysm of hell. If he mislike
My speech and what is done, tell him he has
Hipparchus, my enfranched bondman, whom
He may at pleasure whip, or hang, or torture,
As he shall like, to quit me: urge it thou:
Hence with thy stripes, begone!
Exit THYREUS
Have you done yet?
Alack, our terrene moon
Is now eclipsed
The fall of Antony!
I must stay his time.
To flatter Caesar, would you mingle eyes
With one that ties his points?
Not know me yet?
Cold-hearted toward me?
Ah, dear, if I be so,
From my cold heart let heaven engender hail,
And poison it in the source
Drop in my neck: as it determines, so
Dissolve my life! The next Caesarion smite!
Till by degrees the memory of my womb,
Together with my brave Egyptians all,
By the discandying of this pelleted storm,
Lie graveless, till the flies and gnats of Nile
Have buried them for prey!
I am satisfied.
Caesar sits down in Alexandria
I will oppose his fate. Our force by land
Hath nobly held
Have knit again, and fleet, threatening most sea-like.
Where hast thou been, my heart? Dost thou hear, lady?
If from the field I shall return once more
To kiss these lips, I will appear in blood
I and my sword will earn our chronicle:
There's hope in't yet.
That's my brave lord!
I will be treble-sinew'd, hearted, breathed,
And fight maliciously: for when mine hours
Were nice and lucky, men did ransom lives
Of me for jests
And send to darkness all that stop me. Come,
Let's have one other gaudy night: call to me
All my sad captains
Let's mock the midnight bell.
It is my birth-day:
I had thought to have held it poor: but, since my lord
Is Antony again, I will be Cleopatra.
We will yet do well.
Call all his noble captains to my lord.
Do so, we'll speak to them
The wine peep through their scars. Come on, my queen
There's sap in't yet. The next time I do fight,
I'll make death love me
Even with his pestilent scythe.
Exeunt all but DOMITIUS ENOBARBUS
Now he'll outstare the lightning. To be furious,
Is to be frighted out of fear
The dove will peck the estridge
A diminution in our captain's brain
Restores his heart: when valour preys on reason,
It eats the sword it fights with. I will seek
Some way to leave him.
Exit
ACT IV
SCENE I. Before Alexandria. OCTAVIUS CAESAR's camp.
Enter OCTAVIUS CAESAR, AGRIPPA, and MECAENAS, with his Army
He calls me boy
To beat me out of Egypt
He hath whipp'd with rods
Caesar to Antony: let the old ruffian know
I have many other ways to die
Laugh at his challenge.
Caesar must think,
When one so great begins to rage, he's hunted
Even to falling. Give him no breath, but now
Make boot of his distraction: never anger
Made good guard for itself.
Let our best heads
Know, that to-morrow the last of many battles
We mean to fight: within our files there are,
Of those that served Mark Antony but late,
Enough to fetch him in. See it done:
And feast the army
And they have earn'd the waste. Poor Antony!
Exeunt
SCENE II. Alexandria. CLEOPATRA's palace.
Enter MARK ANTONY, CLEOPATRA, DOMITIUS ENOBARBUS, CHARMIAN, IRAS, ALEXAS, with others
He will not fight with me, Domitius.
No.
Why should he not?
He thinks, being twenty times of better fortune,
He is twenty men to one.
To-morrow, soldier,
By sea and land I'll fight: or I will live,
Or bathe my dying honour in the blood
Shall make it live again. Woo't thou fight well?
I'll strike, and cry 'Take all.'
Well said
Call forth my household servants: let's to-night
Be bounteous at our meal.
Enter three or four Servitors
Give me thy hand,
Thou hast been rightly honest
Thou,--and thou,--and thou:--you have served me well,
And kings have been your fellows.
[Aside to DOMITIUS ENOBARBUS]  What means this?
[Aside to CLEOPATRA]  'Tis one of those odd
tricks which sorrow shoots
Out of the mind.
And thou art honest too.
I wish I could be made so many men,
And all of you clapp'd up together in
An Antony, that I might do you service
So good as you have done.
The gods forbid!
Well, my good fellows, wait on me to-night:
Scant not my cups
As when mine empire was your fellow too,
And suffer'd my command.
[Aside to DOMITIUS ENOBARBUS]  What does he mean?
[Aside to CLEOPATRA]  To make his followers weep.
Tend me to-night
May be it is the period of your duty:
Haply you shall not see me more
A mangled shadow: perchance to-morrow
You'll serve another master. I look on you
As one that takes his leave. Mine honest friends,
I turn you not away
Married to your good service, stay till death:
Tend me to-night two hours, I ask no more,
And the gods yield you for't!
What mean you, sir,
To give them this discomfort? Look, they weep
And I, an ass, am onion-eyed: for shame,
Transform us not to women.
Ho, ho, ho!
Now the witch take me, if I meant it thus!
Grace grow where those drops fall!
My hearty friends,
You take me in too dolorous a sense
For I spake to you for your comfort
To burn this night with torches: know, my hearts,
I hope well of to-morrow
Where rather I'll expect victorious life
Than death and honour. Let's to supper, come,
And drown consideration.
Exeunt
SCENE III. The same. Before the palace.
Enter two Soldiers to their guard
Brother, good night: to-morrow is the day.
It will determine one way: fare you well.
Heard you of nothing strange about the streets?
Nothing. What news?
Belike 'tis but a rumour. Good night to you.
Well, sir, good night.
Enter two other Soldiers
Soldiers, have careful watch.
And you. Good night, good night.
They place themselves in every corner of the stage
Here we: and if to-morrow
Our navy thrive, I have an absolute hope
Our landmen will stand up.
'Tis a brave army,
And full of purpose.
Music of the hautboys as under the stage
Peace! what noise?
List, list!
Hark!
Music i' the air.
Under the earth.
It signs well, does it not?
No.
Peace, I say!
What should this mean?
'Tis the god Hercules, whom Antony loved,
Now leaves him.
Walk
Do hear what we do?
They advance to another post
How now, masters!
[Speaking together]  How now!
How now! do you hear this?
Ay
Do you hear, masters? do you hear?
Follow the noise so far as we have quarter
Let's see how it will give off.
Content. 'Tis strange.
Exeunt
SCENE IV. The same. A room in the palace.
Enter MARK ANTONY and CLEOPATRA, CHARMIAN, and others attending
Eros! mine armour, Eros!
Sleep a little.
No, my chuck. Eros, come
Enter EROS with armour
Come good fellow, put mine iron on:
If fortune be not ours to-day, it is
Because we brave her: come.
Nay, I'll help too.
What's this for?
Ah, let be, let be! thou art
The armourer of my heart: false, false
Sooth, la, I'll help: thus it must be.
Well, well
We shall thrive now. Seest thou, my good fellow?
Go put on thy defences.
Briefly, sir.
Is not this buckled well?
Rarely, rarely:
He that unbuckles this, till we do please
To daff't for our repose, shall hear a storm.
Thou fumblest, Eros
More tight at this than thou: dispatch. O love,
That thou couldst see my wars to-day, and knew'st
The royal occupation! thou shouldst see
A workman in't.
Enter an armed Soldier
Good morrow to thee
Thou look'st like him that knows a warlike charge:
To business that we love we rise betime,
And go to't with delight.
A thousand, sir,
Early though't be, have on their riveted trim,
And at the port expect you.
Shout. Trumpets flourish
Enter Captains and Soldiers
The morn is fair. Good morrow, general.
Good morrow, general.
'Tis well blown, lads:
This morning, like the spirit of a youth
That means to be of note, begins betimes.
So, so
Fare thee well, dame, whate'er becomes of me:
This is a soldier's kiss: rebukeable
Kisses her
And worthy shameful cheque it were, to stand
On more mechanic compliment
Now, like a man of steel. You that will fight,
Follow me close
Exeunt MARK ANTONY, EROS, Captains, and Soldiers
Please you, retire to your chamber.
Lead me.
He goes forth gallantly. That he and Caesar might
Determine this great war in single fight!
Then Antony,--but now--Well, on.
Exeunt
SCENE V. Alexandria. MARK ANTONY's camp.
Trumpets sound. Enter MARK ANTONY and EROS
The gods make this a happy day to Antony!
Would thou and those thy scars had once prevail'd
To make me fight at land!
Hadst thou done so,
The kings that have revolted, and the soldier
That has this morning left thee, would have still
Follow'd thy heels.
Who's gone this morning?
Who!
One ever near thee: call for Enobarbus,
He shall not hear thee
Say 'I am none of thine.'
What say'st thou?
Sir,
He is with Caesar.
Sir, his chests and treasure
He has not with him.
Is he gone?
Most certain.
Go, Eros, send his treasure after
Detain no jot, I charge thee: write to him--
I will subscribe--gentle adieus and greetings
Say that I wish he never find more cause
To change a master. O, my fortunes have
Corrupted honest men! Dispatch.--Enobarbus!
Exeunt
SCENE VI. Alexandria. OCTAVIUS CAESAR's camp.
Flourish. Enter OCTAVIUS CAESAR, AGRIPPA, with DOMITIUS ENOBARBUS, and others
Go forth, Agrippa, and begin the fight:
Our will is Antony be took alive
Make it so known.
Caesar, I shall.
Exit
The time of universal peace is near:
Prove this a prosperous day, the three-nook'd world
Shall bear the olive freely.
Enter a Messenger
Antony
Is come into the field.
Go charge Agrippa
Plant those that have revolted in the van,
That Antony may seem to spend his fury
Upon himself.
Exeunt all but DOMITIUS ENOBARBUS
Alexas did revolt
Affairs of Antony
Great Herod to incline himself to Caesar,
And leave his master Antony: for this pains
Caesar hath hang'd him. Canidius and the rest
That fell away have entertainment, but
No honourable trust. I have done ill
Of which I do accuse myself so sorely,
That I will joy no more.
Enter a Soldier of CAESAR's
Enobarbus, Antony
Hath after thee sent all thy treasure, with
His bounty overplus: the messenger
Came on my guard
Unloading of his mules.
I give it you.
Mock not, Enobarbus.
I tell you true: best you safed the bringer
Out of the host
Or would have done't myself. Your emperor
Continues still a Jove.
Exit
I am alone the villain of the earth,
And feel I am so most. O Antony,
Thou mine of bounty, how wouldst thou have paid
My better service, when my turpitude
Thou dost so crown with gold! This blows my heart:
If swift thought break it not, a swifter mean
Shall outstrike thought: but thought will do't, I feel.
I fight against thee! No: I will go seek
Some ditch wherein to die
My latter part of life.
Exit
SCENE VII. Field of battle between the camps.
Alarum. Drums and trumpets. Enter AGRIPPA and others
Retire, we have engaged ourselves too far:
Caesar himself has work, and our oppression
Exceeds what we expected.
Exeunt
Alarums. Enter MARK ANTONY and SCARUS wounded
O my brave emperor, this is fought indeed!
Had we done so at first, we had droven them home
With clouts about their heads.
Thou bleed'st apace.
I had a wound here that was like a T,
But now 'tis made an H.
They do retire.
We'll beat 'em into bench-holes: I have yet
Room for six scotches more.
Enter EROS
They are beaten, sir, and our advantage serves
For a fair victory.
Let us score their backs,
And snatch 'em up, as we take hares, behind:
'Tis sport to maul a runner.
I will reward thee
Once for thy spritely comfort, and ten-fold
For thy good valour. Come thee on.
I'll halt after.
Exeunt
SCENE VIII. Under the walls of Alexandria.
Alarum. Enter MARK ANTONY, in a march
We have beat him to his camp: run one before,
And let the queen know of our gests. To-morrow,
Before the sun shall see 's, we'll spill the blood
That has to-day escaped. I thank you all
For doughty-handed are you, and have fought
Not as you served the cause, but as 't had been
Each man's like mine
Enter the city, clip your wives, your friends,
Tell them your feats
Wash the congealment from your wounds, and kiss
The honour'd gashes whole.
To SCARUS
Give me thy hand
Enter CLEOPATRA, attended
To this great fairy I'll commend thy acts,
Make her thanks bless thee.
To CLEOPATRA
O thou day o' the world,
Chain mine arm'd neck
Through proof of harness to my heart, and there
Ride on the pants triumphing!
Lord of lords!
O infinite virtue, comest thou smiling from
The world's great snare uncaught?
My nightingale,
We have beat them to their beds. What, girl!
though grey
Do something mingle with our younger brown, yet ha' we
A brain that nourishes our nerves, and can
Get goal for goal of youth. Behold this man
Commend unto his lips thy favouring hand:
Kiss it, my warrior: he hath fought to-day
As if a god, in hate of mankind, had
Destroy'd in such a shape.
I'll give thee, friend,
An armour all of gold
He has deserved it, were it carbuncled
Like holy Phoebus' car. Give me thy hand:
Through Alexandria make a jolly march
Bear our hack'd targets like the men that owe them:
Had our great palace the capacity
To camp this host, we all would sup together,
And drink carouses to the next day's fate,
Which promises royal peril. Trumpeters,
With brazen din blast you the city's ear
Make mingle with rattling tabourines
That heaven and earth may strike their sounds together,
Applauding our approach.
Exeunt
SCENE IX. OCTAVIUS CAESAR's camp.
Sentinels at their post
If we be not relieved within this hour,
We must return to the court of guard: the night
Is shiny
By the second hour i' the morn.
This last day was
A shrewd one to's.
Enter DOMITIUS ENOBARBUS
O, bear me witness, night,--
What man is this?
Stand close, and list him.
Be witness to me, O thou blessed moon,
When men revolted shall upon record
Bear hateful memory, poor Enobarbus did
Before thy face repent!
Enobarbus!
Peace!
Hark further.
O sovereign mistress of true melancholy,
The poisonous damp of night disponge upon me,
That life, a very rebel to my will,
May hang no longer on me: throw my heart
Against the flint and hardness of my fault:
Which, being dried with grief, will break to powder,
And finish all foul thoughts. O Antony,
Nobler than my revolt is infamous,
Forgive me in thine own particular
But let the world rank me in register
A master-leaver and a fugitive:
O Antony! O Antony!
Dies
Let's speak To him.
Let's hear him, for the things he speaks
May concern Caesar.
Let's do so. But he sleeps.
Swoons rather
Was never yet for sleep.
Go we to him.
Awake, sir, awake
Hear you, sir?
The hand of death hath raught him.
Drums afar off
Hark! the drums
Demurely wake the sleepers. Let us bear him
To the court of guard
Is fully out.
Come on, then
He may recover yet.
Exeunt with the body
SCENE X. Between the two camps.
Enter MARK ANTONY and SCARUS, with their Army
Their preparation is to-day by sea
We please them not by land.
For both, my lord.
I would they'ld fight i' the fire or i' the air
We'ld fight there too. But this it is
Upon the hills adjoining to the city
Shall stay with us: order for sea is given
They have put forth the haven
Where their appointment we may best discover,
And look on their endeavour.
Exeunt
SCENE XI. Another part of the same.
Enter OCTAVIUS CAESAR, and his Army
But being charged, we will be still by land,
Which, as I take't, we shall
Is forth to man his galleys. To the vales,
And hold our best advantage.
Exeunt
SCENE XII. Another part of the same.
Enter MARK ANTONY and SCARUS
Yet they are not join'd: where yond pine
does stand,
I shall discover all: I'll bring thee word
Straight, how 'tis like to go.
Exit
Swallows have built
In Cleopatra's sails their nests: the augurers
Say they know not, they cannot tell
And dare not speak their knowledge. Antony
Is valiant, and dejected
His fretted fortunes give him hope, and fear,
Of what he has, and has not.
Alarum afar off, as at a sea-fight
Re-enter MARK ANTONY
All is lost
This foul Egyptian hath betrayed me:
My fleet hath yielded to the foe
They cast their caps up and carouse together
Like friends long lost. Triple-turn'd whore!
'tis thou
Hast sold me to this novice
Makes only wars on thee. Bid them all fly
For when I am revenged upon my charm,
I have done all. Bid them all fly
Exit SCARUS
O sun, thy uprise shall I see no more:
Fortune and Antony part here
Do we shake hands. All come to this? The hearts
That spaniel'd me at heels, to whom I gave
Their wishes, do discandy, melt their sweets
On blossoming Caesar
That overtopp'd them all. Betray'd I am:
O this false soul of Egypt! this grave charm,--
Whose eye beck'd forth my wars, and call'd them home
Whose bosom was my crownet, my chief end,--
Like a right gipsy, hath, at fast and loose,
Beguiled me to the very heart of loss.
What, Eros, Eros!
Enter CLEOPATRA
Ah, thou spell! Avaunt!
Why is my lord enraged against his love?
Vanish, or I shall give thee thy deserving,
And blemish Caesar's triumph. Let him take thee,
And hoist thee up to the shouting plebeians:
Follow his chariot, like the greatest spot
Of all thy sex
For poor'st diminutives, for doits
Patient Octavia plough thy visage up
With her prepared nails.
Exit CLEOPATRA
'Tis well thou'rt gone,
If it be well to live
Thou fell'st into my fury, for one death
Might have prevented many. Eros, ho!
The shirt of Nessus is upon me: teach me,
Alcides, thou mine ancestor, thy rage:
Let me lodge Lichas on the horns o' the moon
And with those hands, that grasp'd the heaviest club,
Subdue my worthiest self. The witch shall die:
To the young Roman boy she hath sold me, and I fall
Under this plot
Exit
SCENE XIII. Alexandria. Cleopatra's palace.
Enter CLEOPATRA, CHARMIAN, IRAS, and MARDIAN
Help me, my women! O, he is more mad
Than Telamon for his shield
Was never so emboss'd.
To the monument!
There lock yourself, and send him word you are dead.
The soul and body rive not more in parting
Than greatness going off.
To the monument!
Mardian, go tell him I have slain myself
Say, that the last I spoke was 'Antony,'
And word it, prithee, piteously: hence, Mardian,
And bring me how he takes my death.
To the monument!
Exeunt
SCENE XIV. The same. Another room.
Enter MARK ANTONY and EROS
Eros, thou yet behold'st me?
Ay, noble lord.
Sometimes we see a cloud that's dragonish
A vapour sometime like a bear or lion,
A tower'd citadel, a pendent rock,
A forked mountain, or blue promontory
With trees upon't, that nod unto the world,
And mock our eyes with air: thou hast seen
these signs
They are black vesper's pageants.
Ay, my lord,
That which is now a horse, even with a thought
The rack dislimns, and makes it indistinct,
As water is in water.
It does, my lord.
My good knave Eros, now thy captain is
Even such a body: here I am Antony:
Yet cannot hold this visible shape, my knave.
I made these wars for Egypt: and the queen,--
Whose heart I thought I had, for she had mine
Which whilst it was mine had annex'd unto't
A million more, now lost,--she, Eros, has
Pack'd cards with Caesar, and false-play'd my glory
Unto an enemy's triumph.
Nay, weep not, gentle Eros
Ourselves to end ourselves.
Enter MARDIAN
O! thy vile lady!
She has robb'd me of my sword.
No, Antony
My mistress loved thee, and her fortunes mingled
With thine entirely.
Hence, saucy eunuch
She hath betray'd me and shall die the death.
Death of one person can be paid but once,
And that she has discharged: what thou wouldst do
Is done unto thy hand: the last she spake
Was 'Antony! most noble Antony!'
Then in the midst a tearing groan did break
The name of Antony
Between her heart and lips: she render'd life,
Thy name so buried in her.
Dead, then?
Dead.
Unarm, Eros
And we must sleep.
To MARDIAN
That thou depart'st hence safe,
Does pay thy labour richly
Exit MARDIAN
Off, pluck off:
The seven-fold shield of Ajax cannot keep
The battery from my heart. O, cleave, my sides!
Heart, once be stronger than thy continent,
Crack thy frail case! Apace, Eros, apace.
No more a soldier: bruised pieces, go
You have been nobly borne. From me awhile.
Exit EROS
I will o'ertake thee, Cleopatra, and
Weep for my pardon. So it must be, for now
All length is torture: since the torch is out,
Lie down, and stray no farther: now all labour
Mars what it does
Itself with strength: seal then, and all is done.
Eros!--I come, my queen:--Eros!--Stay for me:
Where souls do couch on flowers, we'll hand in hand,
And with our sprightly port make the ghosts gaze:
Dido and her AEneas shall want troops,
And all the haunt be ours. Come, Eros, Eros!
Re-enter EROS
What would my lord?
Since Cleopatra died,
I have lived in such dishonour, that the gods
Detest my baseness. I, that with my sword
Quarter'd the world, and o'er green Neptune's back
With ships made cities, condemn myself to lack
The courage of a woman
Than she which by her death our Caesar tells
'I am conqueror of myself.' Thou art sworn, Eros,
That, when the exigent should come, which now
Is come indeed, when I should see behind me
The inevitable prosecution of
Disgrace and horror, that, on my command,
Thou then wouldst kill me: do't
Thou strikest not me, 'tis Caesar thou defeat'st.
Put colour in thy cheek.
The gods withhold me!
Shall I do that which all the Parthian darts,
Though enemy, lost aim, and could not?
Eros,
Wouldst thou be window'd in great Rome and see
Thy master thus with pleach'd arms, bending down
His corrigible neck, his face subdued
To penetrative shame, whilst the wheel'd seat
Of fortunate Caesar, drawn before him, branded
His baseness that ensued?
I would not see't.
Come, then
Draw that thy honest sword, which thou hast worn
Most useful for thy country.
O, sir, pardon me!
When I did make thee free, sworest thou not then
To do this when I bade thee? Do it at once
Or thy precedent services are all
But accidents unpurposed. Draw, and come.
Turn from me, then, that noble countenance,
Wherein the worship of the whole world lies.
Lo thee!
Turning from him
My sword is drawn.
Then let it do at once
The thing why thou hast drawn it.
My dear master,
My captain, and my emperor, let me say,
Before I strike this bloody stroke, farewell.
'Tis said, man
Farewell, great chief. Shall I strike now?
Now, Eros.
Why, there then: thus I do escape the sorrow
Of Antony's death.
Kills himself
Thrice-nobler than myself!
Thou teachest me, O valiant Eros, what
I should, and thou couldst not. My queen and Eros
Have by their brave instruction got upon me
A nobleness in record: but I will be
A bridegroom in my death, and run into't
As to a lover's bed. Come, then
Thy master dies thy scholar: to do thus
Falling on his sword
I learn'd of thee. How! not dead? not dead?
The guard, ho! O, dispatch me!
Enter DERCETAS and Guard
What's the noise?
I have done my work in, friends: O, make an end
Of what I have begun.
The star is fall'n.
And time is at his period.
Alas, and woe!
Let him that loves me strike me dead.
Not I.
Nor I.
Nor any one.
Exeunt Guard
Thy death and fortunes bid thy followers fly.
This sword but shown to Caesar, with this tidings,
Shall enter me with him.
Enter DIOMEDES
Where's Antony?
There, Diomed there.
Lives he?
Wilt thou not answer, man?
Exit DERCETAS
Art thou there, Diomed? Draw thy sword, and give me
Sufficing strokes for death.
Most absolute lord,
My mistress Cleopatra sent me to thee.
When did she send thee?
Now, my lord.
Where is she?
Lock'd in her monument. She had a prophesying fear
Of what hath come to pass: for when she saw--
Which never shall be found--you did suspect
She had disposed with Caesar, and that your rage
Would not be purged, she sent you word she was dead
But, fearing since how it might work, hath sent
Me to proclaim the truth
I dread, too late.
Too late, good Diomed: call my guard, I prithee.
What, ho, the emperor's guard! The guard, what, ho!
Come, your lord calls!
Enter four or five of the Guard of MARK ANTONY
Bear me, good friends, where Cleopatra bides
'Tis the last service that I shall command you.
Woe, woe are we, sir, you may not live to wear
All your true followers out.
Most heavy day!
Nay, good my fellows, do not please sharp fate
To grace it with your sorrows: bid that welcome
Which comes to punish us, and we punish it
Seeming to bear it lightly. Take me up:
I have led you oft: carry me now, good friends,
And have my thanks for all.
Exeunt, bearing MARK ANTONY
SCENE XV. The same. A monument.
Enter CLEOPATRA and her maids aloft, with CHARMIAN and IRAS
O Charmian, I will never go from hence.
Be comforted, dear madam.
No, I will not:
All strange and terrible events are welcome,
But comforts we despise
Proportion'd to our cause, must be as great
As that which makes it.
Enter, below, DIOMEDES
How now! is he dead?
His death's upon him, but not dead.
Look out o' the other side your monument
His guard have brought him thither.
Enter, below, MARK ANTONY, borne by the Guard
O sun,
Burn the great sphere thou movest in!
darkling stand
The varying shore o' the world. O Antony,
Antony, Antony! Help, Charmian, help, Iras, help
Help, friends below
Peace!
Not Caesar's valour hath o'erthrown Antony,
But Antony's hath triumph'd on itself.
So it should be, that none but Antony
Should conquer Antony
I am dying, Egypt, dying
I here importune death awhile, until
Of many thousand kisses the poor last
I lay up thy lips.
I dare not, dear,--
Dear my lord, pardon,--I dare not,
Lest I be taken: not the imperious show
Of the full-fortuned Caesar ever shall
Be brooch'd with me
serpents, have
Edge, sting, or operation, I am safe:
Your wife Octavia, with her modest eyes
And still conclusion, shall acquire no honour
Demuring upon me. But come, come, Antony,--
Help me, my women,--we must draw thee up:
Assist, good friends.
O, quick, or I am gone.
Here's sport indeed! How heavy weighs my lord!
Our strength is all gone into heaviness,
That makes the weight: had I great Juno's power,
The strong-wing'd Mercury should fetch thee up,
And set thee by Jove's side. Yet come a little,--
Wishes were ever fools,--O, come, come, come
They heave MARK ANTONY aloft to CLEOPATRA
And welcome, welcome! die where thou hast lived:
Quicken with kissing: had my lips that power,
Thus would I wear them out.
A heavy sight!
I am dying, Egypt, dying:
Give me some wine, and let me speak a little.
No, let me speak
That the false housewife Fortune break her wheel,
Provoked by my offence.
One word, sweet queen:
Of Caesar seek your honour, with your safety. O!
They do not go together.
Gentle, hear me:
None about Caesar trust but Proculeius.
My resolution and my hands I'll trust
None about Caesar.
The miserable change now at my end
Lament nor sorrow at
In feeding them with those my former fortunes
Wherein I lived, the greatest prince o' the world,
The noblest
Not cowardly put off my helmet to
My countryman,--a Roman by a Roman
Valiantly vanquish'd. Now my spirit is going
I can no more.
Noblest of men, woo't die?
Hast thou no care of me? shall I abide
In this dull world, which in thy absence is
No better than a sty? O, see, my women,
MARK ANTONY dies
The crown o' the earth doth melt. My lord!
O, wither'd is the garland of the war,
The soldier's pole is fall'n: young boys and girls
Are level now with men
And there is nothing left remarkable
Beneath the visiting moon.
Faints
O, quietness, lady!
She is dead too, our sovereign.
Lady!
Madam!
O madam, madam, madam!
Royal Egypt, Empress!
Peace, peace, Iras!
No more, but e'en a woman, and commanded
By such poor passion as the maid that milks
And does the meanest chares. It were for me
To throw my sceptre at the injurious gods
To tell them that this world did equal theirs
Till they had stol'n our jewel. All's but naught
Patience is scottish, and impatience does
Become a dog that's mad: then is it sin
To rush into the secret house of death,
Ere death dare come to us? How do you, women?
What, what! good cheer! Why, how now, Charmian!
My noble girls! Ah, women, women, look,
Our lamp is spent, it's out! Good sirs, take heart:
We'll bury him
what's noble,
Let's do it after the high Roman fashion,
And make death proud to take us. Come, away:
This case of that huge spirit now is cold:
Ah, women, women! come
But resolution, and the briefest end.
Exeunt
ACT V
SCENE I. Alexandria. OCTAVIUS CAESAR's camp.
Enter OCTAVIUS CAESAR, AGRIPPA, DOLABELLA, MECAENAS, GALLUS, PROCULEIUS, and others, his council of war
Go to him, Dolabella, bid him yield
Being so frustrate, tell him he mocks
The pauses that he makes.
Caesar, I shall.
Exit
Enter DERCETAS, with the sword of MARK ANTONY
Wherefore is that? and what art thou that darest
Appear thus to us?
I am call'd Dercetas
Mark Antony I served, who best was worthy
Best to be served: whilst he stood up and spoke,
He was my master
To spend upon his haters. If thou please
To take me to thee, as I was to him
I'll be to Caesar
I yield thee up my life.
What is't thou say'st?
I say, O Caesar, Antony is dead.
The breaking of so great a thing should make
A greater crack: the round world
Should have shook lions into civil streets,
And citizens to their dens: the death of Antony
Is not a single doom
A moiety of the world.
He is dead, Caesar:
Not by a public minister of justice,
Nor by a hired knife
Which writ his honour in the acts it did,
Hath, with the courage which the heart did lend it,
Splitted the heart. This is his sword
I robb'd his wound of it
With his most noble blood.
Look you sad, friends?
The gods rebuke me, but it is tidings
To wash the eyes of kings.
And strange it is,
That nature must compel us to lament
Our most persisted deeds.
His taints and honours
Waged equal with him.
A rarer spirit never
Did steer humanity: but you, gods, will give us
Some faults to make us men. Caesar is touch'd.
When such a spacious mirror's set before him,
He needs must see himself.
O Antony!
I have follow'd thee to this
Diseases in our bodies: I must perforce
Have shown to thee such a declining day,
Or look on thine
In the whole world: but yet let me lament,
With tears as sovereign as the blood of hearts,
That thou, my brother, my competitor
In top of all design, my mate in empire,
Friend and companion in the front of war,
The arm of mine own body, and the heart
Where mine his thoughts did kindle,--that our stars,
Unreconciliable, should divide
Our equalness to this. Hear me, good friends--
But I will tell you at some meeter season:
Enter an Egyptian
The business of this man looks out of him
We'll hear him what he says. Whence are you?
A poor Egyptian yet. The queen my mistress,
Confined in all she has, her monument,
Of thy intents desires instruction,
That she preparedly may frame herself
To the way she's forced to.
Bid her have good heart:
She soon shall know of us, by some of ours,
How honourable and how kindly we
Determine for her
To be ungentle.
So the gods preserve thee!
Exit
Come hither, Proculeius. Go and say,
We purpose her no shame: give her what comforts
The quality of her passion shall require,
Lest, in her greatness, by some mortal stroke
She do defeat us
Would be eternal in our triumph: go,
And with your speediest bring us what she says,
And how you find of her.
Caesar, I shall.
Exit
Gallus, go you along.
Exit GALLUS
Where's Dolabella,
To second Proculeius?
Dolabella!
Let him alone, for I remember now
How he's employ'd: he shall in time be ready.
Go with me to my tent
How hardly I was drawn into this war
How calm and gentle I proceeded still
In all my writings: go with me, and see
What I can show in this.
Exeunt
SCENE II. Alexandria. A room in the monument.
Enter CLEOPATRA, CHARMIAN, and IRAS
My desolation does begin to make
A better life. 'Tis paltry to be Caesar
Not being Fortune, he's but Fortune's knave,
A minister of her will: and it is great
To do that thing that ends all other deeds
Which shackles accidents and bolts up change
Which sleeps, and never palates more the dug,
The beggar's nurse and Caesar's.
Enter, to the gates of the monument, PROCULEIUS, GALLUS and Soldiers
Caesar sends greeting to the Queen of Egypt
And bids thee study on what fair demands
Thou mean'st to have him grant thee.
What's thy name?
My name is Proculeius.
Antony
Did tell me of you, bade me trust you
I do not greatly care to be deceived,
That have no use for trusting. If your master
Would have a queen his beggar, you must tell him,
That majesty, to keep decorum, must
No less beg than a kingdom: if he please
To give me conquer'd Egypt for my son,
He gives me so much of mine own, as I
Will kneel to him with thanks.
Be of good cheer
You're fall'n into a princely hand, fear nothing:
Make your full reference freely to my lord,
Who is so full of grace, that it flows over
On all that need: let me report to him
Your sweet dependency
A conqueror that will pray in aid for kindness,
Where he for grace is kneel'd to.
Pray you, tell him
I am his fortune's vassal, and I send him
The greatness he has got. I hourly learn
A doctrine of obedience
Look him i' the face.
This I'll report, dear lady.
Have comfort, for I know your plight is pitied
Of him that caused it.
You see how easily she may be surprised:
Here PROCULEIUS and two of the Guard ascend the  monument by a ladder placed against a window, and,  having descended, come behind CLEOPATRA. Some of the Guard unbar and open the gates
To PROCULEIUS and the Guard
Guard her till Caesar come.
Exit
Royal queen!
O Cleopatra! thou art taken, queen:
Quick, quick, good hands.
Drawing a dagger
Hold, worthy lady, hold:
Seizes and disarms her
Do not yourself such wrong, who are in this
Relieved, but not betray'd.
What, of death too,
That rids our dogs of languish?
Cleopatra,
Do not abuse my master's bounty by
The undoing of yourself: let the world see
His nobleness well acted, which your death
Will never let come forth.
Where art thou, death?
Come hither, come! come, come, and take a queen
Worthy many babes and beggars!
O, temperance, lady!
Sir, I will eat no meat, I'll not drink, sir
If idle talk will once be necessary,
I'll not sleep neither: this mortal house I'll ruin,
Do Caesar what he can. Know, sir, that I
Will not wait pinion'd at your master's court
Nor once be chastised with the sober eye
Of dull Octavia. Shall they hoist me up
And show me to the shouting varletry
Of censuring Rome? Rather a ditch in Egypt
Be gentle grave unto me! rather on Nilus' mud
Lay me stark naked, and let the water-flies
Blow me into abhorring! rather make
My country's high pyramides my gibbet,
And hang me up in chains!
You do extend
These thoughts of horror further than you shall
Find cause in Caesar.
Enter DOLABELLA
Proculeius,
What thou hast done thy master Caesar knows,
And he hath sent for thee: for the queen,
I'll take her to my guard.
So, Dolabella,
It shall content me best: be gentle to her.
To CLEOPATRA
To Caesar I will speak what you shall please,
If you'll employ me to him.
Say, I would die.
Exeunt PROCULEIUS and Soldiers
Most noble empress, you have heard of me?
I cannot tell.
Assuredly you know me.
No matter, sir, what I have heard or known.
You laugh when boys or women tell their dreams
Is't not your trick?
I understand not, madam.
I dream'd there was an Emperor Antony:
O, such another sleep, that I might see
But such another man!
If it might please ye,--
His face was as the heavens
A sun and moon, which kept their course,
and lighted
The little O, the earth.
Most sovereign creature,--
His legs bestrid the ocean: his rear'd arm
Crested the world: his voice was propertied
As all the tuned spheres, and that to friends
But when he meant to quail and shake the orb,
He was as rattling thunder. For his bounty,
There was no winter in't
That grew the more by reaping: his delights
Were dolphin-like
The element they lived in: in his livery
Walk'd crowns and crownets
As plates dropp'd from his pocket.
Cleopatra!
Think you there was, or might be, such a man
As this I dream'd of?
Gentle madam, no.
You lie, up to the hearing of the gods.
But, if there be, or ever were, one such,
It's past the size of dreaming: nature wants stuff
To vie strange forms with fancy
And Antony, were nature's piece 'gainst fancy,
Condemning shadows quite.
Hear me, good madam.
Your loss is as yourself, great
As answering to the weight: would I might never
O'ertake pursued success, but I do feel,
By the rebound of yours, a grief that smites
My very heart at root.
I thank you, sir,
Know you what Caesar means to do with me?
I am loath to tell you what I would you knew.
Nay, pray you, sir,--
Though he be honourable,--
He'll lead me, then, in triumph?
Madam, he will
Flourish, and shout within, 'Make way there: Octavius Caesar!'
Enter OCTAVIUS CAESAR, GALLUS, PROCULEIUS, MECAENAS, SELEUCUS, and others of his Train
Which is the Queen of Egypt?
It is the emperor, madam.
CLEOPATRA kneels
Arise, you shall not kneel:
I pray you, rise
Sir, the gods
Will have it thus
I must obey.
Take to you no hard thoughts:
The record of what injuries you did us,
Though written in our flesh, we shall remember
As things but done by chance.
Sole sir o' the world,
I cannot project mine own cause so well
To make it clear
Been laden with like frailties which before
Have often shamed our sex.
Cleopatra, know,
We will extenuate rather than enforce:
If you apply yourself to our intents,
Which towards you are most gentle, you shall find
A benefit in this change
To lay on me a cruelty, by taking
Antony's course, you shall bereave yourself
Of my good purposes, and put your children
To that destruction which I'll guard them from,
If thereon you rely. I'll take my leave.
And may, through all the world: 'tis yours
Your scutcheons and your signs of conquest, shall
Hang in what place you please. Here, my good lord.
You shall advise me in all for Cleopatra.
This is the brief of money, plate, and jewels,
I am possess'd of: 'tis exactly valued
Not petty things admitted. Where's Seleucus?
Here, madam.
This is my treasurer: let him speak, my lord,
Upon his peril, that I have reserved
To myself nothing. Speak the truth, Seleucus.
Madam,
I had rather seal my lips, than, to my peril,
Speak that which is not.
What have I kept back?
Enough to purchase what you have made known.
Nay, blush not, Cleopatra
Your wisdom in the deed.
See, Caesar! O, behold,
How pomp is follow'd! mine will now be yours
And, should we shift estates, yours would be mine.
The ingratitude of this Seleucus does
Even make me wild: O slave, of no more trust
Than love that's hired! What, goest thou back? thou shalt
Go back, I warrant thee
Though they had wings: slave, soulless villain, dog!
O rarely base!
Good queen, let us entreat you.
O Caesar, what a wounding shame is this,
That thou, vouchsafing here to visit me,
Doing the honour of thy lordliness
To one so meek, that mine own servant should
Parcel the sum of my disgraces by
Addition of his envy! Say, good Caesar,
That I some lady trifles have reserved,
Immoment toys, things of such dignity
As we greet modern friends withal
Some nobler token I have kept apart
For Livia and Octavia, to induce
Their mediation
With one that I have bred? The gods! it smites me
Beneath the fall I have.
To SELEUCUS
Prithee, go hence
Or I shall show the cinders of my spirits
Through the ashes of my chance: wert thou a man,
Thou wouldst have mercy on me.
Forbear, Seleucus.
Exit SELEUCUS
Be it known, that we, the greatest, are misthought
For things that others do
We answer others' merits in our name,
Are therefore to be pitied.
Cleopatra,
Not what you have reserved, nor what acknowledged,
Put we i' the roll of conquest: still be't yours,
Bestow it at your pleasure
Caesar's no merchant, to make prize with you
Of things that merchants sold. Therefore be cheer'd
Make not your thoughts your prisons: no, dear queen
For we intend so to dispose you as
Yourself shall give us counsel. Feed, and sleep:
Our care and pity is so much upon you,
That we remain your friend
My master, and my lord!
Not so. Adieu.
Flourish. Exeunt OCTAVIUS CAESAR and his train
He words me, girls, he words me, that I should not
Be noble to myself: but, hark thee, Charmian.
Whispers CHARMIAN
Finish, good lady
And we are for the dark.
Hie thee again:
I have spoke already, and it is provided
Go put it to the haste.
Madam, I will.
Re-enter DOLABELLA
Where is the queen?
Behold, sir.
Exit
Dolabella!
Madam, as thereto sworn by your command,
Which my love makes religion to obey,
I tell you this: Caesar through Syria
Intends his journey
You with your children will he send before:
Make your best use of this: I have perform'd
Your pleasure and my promise.
Dolabella,
I shall remain your debtor.
I your servant,
Adieu, good queen
Farewell, and thanks.
Exit DOLABELLA
Now, Iras, what think'st thou?
Thou, an Egyptian puppet, shalt be shown
In Rome, as well as I	mechanic slaves
With greasy aprons, rules, and hammers, shall
Uplift us to the view
Rank of gross diet, shall be enclouded,
And forced to drink their vapour.
The gods forbid!
Nay, 'tis most certain, Iras: saucy lictors
Will catch at us, like strumpets
Ballad us out o' tune: the quick comedians
Extemporally will stage us, and present
Our Alexandrian revels
Shall be brought drunken forth, and I shall see
Some squeaking Cleopatra boy my greatness
I' the posture of a whore.
O the good gods!
Nay, that's certain.
I'll never see 't
Are stronger than mine eyes.
Why, that's the way
To fool their preparation, and to conquer
Their most absurd intents.
Re-enter CHARMIAN
Now, Charmian!
Show me, my women, like a queen: go fetch
My best attires: I am again for Cydnus,
To meet Mark Antony: sirrah Iras, go.
Now, noble Charmian, we'll dispatch indeed
And, when thou hast done this chare, I'll give thee leave
To play till doomsday. Bring our crown and all.
Wherefore's this noise?
Exit IRAS. A noise within
Enter a Guardsman
Here is a rural fellow
That will not be denied your highness presence:
He brings you figs.
Let him come in.
Exit Guardsman
What poor an instrument
May do a noble deed! he brings me liberty.
My resolution's placed, and I have nothing
Of woman in me: now from head to foot
I am marble-constant
No planet is of mine.
Re-enter Guardsman, with Clown bringing in a basket
This is the man.
Avoid, and leave him.
Exit Guardsman
Hast thou the pretty worm of Nilus there,
That kills and pains not?
Truly, I have him: but I would not be the party
that should desire you to touch him, for his biting
is immortal
never recover.
Rememberest thou any that have died on't?
Very many, men and women too. I heard of one of
them no longer than yesterday: a very honest woman,
but something given to lie
do, but in the way of honesty: how she died of the
biting of it, what pain she felt: truly, she makes
a very good report o' the worm
believe all that they say, shall never be saved by
half that they do: but this is most fallible, the
worm's an odd worm.
Get thee hence
I wish you all joy of the worm.
Setting down his basket
Farewell.
You must think this, look you, that the worm will
do his kind.
Ay, ay
Look you, the worm is not to be trusted but in the
keeping of wise people
goodness in worm.
Take thou no care
Very good. Give it nothing, I pray you, for it is
not worth the feeding.
Will it eat me?
You must not think I am so simple but I know the
devil himself will not eat a woman: I know that a
woman is a dish for the gods, if the devil dress her
not. But, truly, these same whoreson devils do the
gods great harm in their women
that they make, the devils mar five.
Well, get thee gone
Yes, forsooth: I wish you joy o' the worm.
Exit
Re-enter IRAS with a robe, crown,  and c
Give me my robe, put on my crown
Immortal longings in me: now no more
The juice of Egypt's grape shall moist this lip:
Yare, yare, good Iras
Antony call
To praise my noble act
The luck of Caesar, which the gods give men
To excuse their after wrath: husband, I come:
Now to that name my courage prove my title!
I am fire and air
I give to baser life. So
Come then, and take the last warmth of my lips.
Farewell, kind Charmian
Kisses them. IRAS falls and dies
Have I the aspic in my lips? Dost fall?
If thou and nature can so gently part,
The stroke of death is as a lover's pinch,
Which hurts, and is desired. Dost thou lie still?
If thus thou vanishest, thou tell'st the world
It is not worth leave-taking.
Dissolve, thick cloud, and rain
The gods themselves do weep!
This proves me base:
If she first meet the curled Antony,
He'll make demand of her, and spend that kiss
Which is my heaven to have. Come, thou
mortal wretch,
To an asp, which she applies to her breast
With thy sharp teeth this knot intrinsicate
Of life at once untie: poor venomous fool
Be angry, and dispatch. O, couldst thou speak,
That I might hear thee call great Caesar ass
Unpolicied!
O eastern star!
Peace, peace!
Dost thou not see my baby at my breast,
That sucks the nurse asleep?
O, break! O, break!
As sweet as balm, as soft as air, as gentle,--
O Antony!--Nay, I will take thee too.
Applying another asp to her arm
What should I stay--
Dies
In this vile world? So, fare thee well.
Now boast thee, death, in thy possession lies
A lass unparallel'd. Downy windows, close
And golden Phoebus never be beheld
Of eyes again so royal! Your crown's awry
I'll mend it, and then play.
Enter the Guard, rushing in
Where is the queen?
Speak softly, wake her not.
Caesar hath sent--
Too slow a messenger.
Applies an asp
O, come apace, dispatch! I partly feel thee.
Approach, ho! All's not well: Caesar's beguiled.
There's Dolabella sent from Caesar
What work is here! Charmian, is this well done?
It is well done, and fitting for a princess
Descended of so many royal kings.
Ah, soldier!
Dies
Re-enter DOLABELLA
How goes it here?
All dead.
Caesar, thy thoughts
Touch their effects in this: thyself art coming
To see perform'd the dreaded act which thou
So sought'st to hinder.
Within  'A way there, a way for Caesar!'
Re-enter OCTAVIUS CAESAR and all his train marching
O sir, you are too sure an augurer
That you did fear is done.
Bravest at the last,
She levell'd at our purposes, and, being royal,
Took her own way. The manner of their deaths?
I do not see them bleed.
Who was last with them?
A simple countryman, that brought her figs:
This was his basket.
Poison'd, then.
O Caesar,
This Charmian lived but now
I found her trimming up the diadem
On her dead mistress
And on the sudden dropp'd.
O noble weakness!
If they had swallow'd poison, 'twould appear
By external swelling: but she looks like sleep,
As she would catch another Antony
In her strong toil of grace.
Here, on her breast,
There is a vent of blood and something blown:
The like is on her arm.
This is an aspic's trail: and these fig-leaves
Have slime upon them, such as the aspic leaves
Upon the caves of Nile.
Most probable
That so she died
She hath pursued conclusions infinite
Of easy ways to die. Take up her bed
And bear her women from the monument:
She shall be buried by her Antony:
No grave upon the earth shall clip in it
A pair so famous. High events as these
Strike those that make them
No less in pity than his glory which
Brought them to be lamented. Our army shall
In solemn show attend this funeral
And then to Rome. Come, Dolabella, see
High order in this great solemnity.
Exeunt
ACT I
SCENE I. A hall in DUKE SOLINUS'S palace.
Enter DUKE SOLINUS, AEGEON, Gaoler, Officers, and other Attendants
Proceed, Solinus, to procure my fall
And by the doom of death end woes and all.
Merchant of Syracuse, plead no more
I am not partial to infringe our laws:
The enmity and discord which of late
Sprung from the rancorous outrage of your duke
To merchants, our well-dealing countrymen,
Who wanting guilders to redeem their lives
Have seal'd his rigorous statutes with their bloods,
Excludes all pity from our threatening looks.
For, since the mortal and intestine jars
'Twixt thy seditious countrymen and us,
It hath in solemn synods been decreed
Both by the Syracusians and ourselves,
To admit no traffic to our adverse towns Nay, more,
If any born at Ephesus be seen
At any Syracusian marts and fairs
Again: if any Syracusian born
Come to the bay of Ephesus, he dies,
His goods confiscate to the duke's dispose,
Unless a thousand marks be levied,
To quit the penalty and to ransom him.
Thy substance, valued at the highest rate,
Cannot amount unto a hundred marks
Therefore by law thou art condemned to die.
Yet this my comfort: when your words are done,
My woes end likewise with the evening sun.
Well, Syracusian, say in brief the cause
Why thou departed'st from thy native home
And for what cause thou camest to Ephesus.
A heavier task could not have been imposed
Than I to speak my griefs unspeakable:
Yet, that the world may witness that my end
Was wrought by nature, not by vile offence,
I'll utter what my sorrows give me leave.
In Syracusa was I born, and wed
Unto a woman, happy but for me,
And by me, had not our hap been bad.
With her I lived in joy
By prosperous voyages I often made
To Epidamnum
And the great care of goods at random left
Drew me from kind embracements of my spouse:
From whom my absence was not six months old
Before herself, almost at fainting under
The pleasing punishment that women bear,
Had made provision for her following me
And soon and safe arrived where I was.
There had she not been long, but she became
A joyful mother of two goodly sons
And, which was strange, the one so like the other,
As could not be distinguish'd but by names.
That very hour, and in the self-same inn,
A meaner woman was delivered
Of such a burden, male twins, both alike:
Those,--for their parents were exceeding poor,--
I bought and brought up to attend my sons.
My wife, not meanly proud of two such boys,
Made daily motions for our home return:
Unwilling I agreed. Alas! too soon,
We came aboard.
A league from Epidamnum had we sail'd,
Before the always wind-obeying deep
Gave any tragic instance of our harm:
But longer did we not retain much hope
For what obscured light the heavens did grant
Did but convey unto our fearful minds
A doubtful warrant of immediate death
Which though myself would gladly have embraced,
Yet the incessant weepings of my wife,
Weeping before for what she saw must come,
And piteous plainings of the pretty babes,
That mourn'd for fashion, ignorant what to fear,
Forced me to seek delays for them and me.
And this it was, for other means was none:
The sailors sought for safety by our boat,
And left the ship, then sinking-ripe, to us:
My wife, more careful for the latter-born,
Had fasten'd him unto a small spare mast,
Such as seafaring men provide for storms
To him one of the other twins was bound,
Whilst I had been like heedful of the other:
The children thus disposed, my wife and I,
Fixing our eyes on whom our care was fix'd,
Fasten'd ourselves at either end the mast
And floating straight, obedient to the stream,
Was carried towards Corinth, as we thought.
At length the sun, gazing upon the earth,
Dispersed those vapours that offended us
And by the benefit of his wished light,
The seas wax'd calm, and we discovered
Two ships from far making amain to us,
Of Corinth that, of Epidaurus this:
But ere they came,--O, let me say no more!
Gather the sequel by that went before.
Nay, forward, old man
For we may pity, though not pardon thee.
O, had the gods done so, I had not now
Worthily term'd them merciless to us!
For, ere the ships could meet by twice five leagues,
We were encounterd by a mighty rock
Which being violently borne upon,
Our helpful ship was splitted in the midst
So that, in this unjust divorce of us,
Fortune had left to both of us alike
What to delight in, what to sorrow for.
Her part, poor soul! seeming as burdened
With lesser weight but not with lesser woe,
Was carried with more speed before the wind
And in our sight they three were taken up
By fishermen of Corinth, as we thought.
At length, another ship had seized on us
And, knowing whom it was their hap to save,
Gave healthful welcome to their shipwreck'd guests
And would have reft the fishers of their prey,
Had not their bark been very slow of sail
And therefore homeward did they bend their course.
Thus have you heard me sever'd from my bliss
That by misfortunes was my life prolong'd,
To tell sad stories of my own mishaps.
And for the sake of them thou sorrowest for,
Do me the favour to dilate at full
What hath befall'n of them and thee till now.
My youngest boy, and yet my eldest care,
At eighteen years became inquisitive
After his brother: and importuned me
That his attendant--so his case was like,
Reft of his brother, but retain'd his name--
Might bear him company in the quest of him:
Whom whilst I labour'd of a love to see,
I hazarded the loss of whom I loved.
Five summers have I spent in furthest Greece,
Roaming clean through the bounds of Asia,
And, coasting homeward, came to Ephesus
Hopeless to find, yet loath to leave unsought
Or that or any place that harbours men.
But here must end the story of my life
And happy were I in my timely death,
Could all my travels warrant me they live.
Hapless AEgeon, whom the fates have mark'd
To bear the extremity of dire mishap!
Now, trust me, were it not against our laws,
Against my crown, my oath, my dignity,
Which princes, would they, may not disannul,
My soul would sue as advocate for thee.
But, though thou art adjudged to the death
And passed sentence may not be recall'd
But to our honour's great disparagement,
Yet I will favour thee in what I can.
Therefore, merchant, I'll limit thee this day
To seek thy life by beneficial help:
Try all the friends thou hast in Ephesus
Beg thou, or borrow, to make up the sum,
And live
Gaoler, take him to thy custody.
I will, my lord.
Hopeless and helpless doth AEgeon wend,
But to procrastinate his lifeless end.
Exeunt
SCENE II. The Mart.
Enter ANTIPHOLUS of Syracuse, DROMIO of Syracuse, and First Merchant
Therefore give out you are of Epidamnum,
Lest that your goods too soon be confiscate.
This very day a Syracusian merchant
Is apprehended for arrival here
And not being able to buy out his life
According to the statute of the town,
Dies ere the weary sun set in the west.
There is your money that I had to keep.
ANTIPHOLUS
Go bear it to the Centaur, where we host,
And stay there, Dromio, till I come to thee.
Within this hour it will be dinner-time:
Till that, I'll view the manners of the town,
Peruse the traders, gaze upon the buildings,
And then return and sleep within mine inn,
For with long travel I am stiff and weary.
Get thee away.
Many a man would take you at your word,
And go indeed, having so good a mean.
Exit
ANTIPHOLUS
A trusty villain, sir, that very oft,
When I am dull with care and melancholy,
Lightens my humour with his merry jests.
What, will you walk with me about the town,
And then go to my inn and dine with me?
I am invited, sir, to certain merchants,
Of whom I hope to make much benefit
I crave your pardon. Soon at five o'clock,
Please you, I'll meet with you upon the mart
And afterward consort you till bed-time:
My present business calls me from you now.
ANTIPHOLUS
Farewell till then: I will go lose myself
And wander up and down to view the city.
Sir, I commend you to your own content.
Exit
ANTIPHOLUS
He that commends me to mine own content
Commends me to the thing I cannot get.
I to the world am like a drop of water
That in the ocean seeks another drop,
Who, falling there to find his fellow forth,
Unseen, inquisitive, confounds himself:
So I, to find a mother and a brother,
In quest of them, unhappy, lose myself.
Enter DROMIO of Ephesus
Here comes the almanac of my true date.
What now? how chance thou art return'd so soon?
Return'd so soon! rather approach'd too late:
The capon burns, the pig falls from the spit,
The clock hath strucken twelve upon the bell
My mistress made it one upon my cheek:
She is so hot because the meat is cold
The meat is cold because you come not home
You come not home because you have no stomach
You have no stomach having broke your fast
But we that know what 'tis to fast and pray
Are penitent for your default to-day.
ANTIPHOLUS
Stop in your wind, sir: tell me this, I pray:
Where have you left the money that I gave you?
O,--sixpence, that I had o' Wednesday last
To pay the saddler for my mistress' crupper?
The saddler had it, sir
ANTIPHOLUS
I am not in a sportive humour now:
Tell me, and dally not, where is the money?
We being strangers here, how darest thou trust
So great a charge from thine own custody?
I pray you, air, as you sit at dinner:
I from my mistress come to you in post
If I return, I shall be post indeed,
For she will score your fault upon my pate.
Methinks your maw, like mine, should be your clock,
And strike you home without a messenger.
ANTIPHOLUS
Come, Dromio, come, these jests are out of season
Reserve them till a merrier hour than this.
Where is the gold I gave in charge to thee?
To me, sir? why, you gave no gold to me.
ANTIPHOLUS
Come on, sir knave, have done your foolishness,
And tell me how thou hast disposed thy charge.
My charge was but to fetch you from the mart
Home to your house, the Phoenix, sir, to dinner:
My mistress and her sister stays for you.
ANTIPHOLUS
In what safe place you have bestow'd my money,
Or I shall break that merry sconce of yours
That stands on tricks when I am undisposed:
Where is the thousand marks thou hadst of me?
I have some marks of yours upon my pate,
Some of my mistress' marks upon my shoulders,
But not a thousand marks between you both.
If I should pay your worship those again,
Perchance you will not bear them patiently.
ANTIPHOLUS
Thy mistress' marks? what mistress, slave, hast thou?
Your worship's wife, my mistress at the Phoenix
She that doth fast till you come home to dinner,
And prays that you will hie you home to dinner.
ANTIPHOLUS
What, wilt thou flout me thus unto my face,
Being forbid? There, take you that, sir knave.
What mean you, sir? for God's sake, hold your hands!
Nay, and you will not, sir, I'll take my heels.
Exit
ANTIPHOLUS
Upon my life, by some device or other
The villain is o'er-raught of all my money.
They say this town is full of cozenage,
As, nimble jugglers that deceive the eye,
Dark-working sorcerers that change the mind,
Soul-killing witches that deform the body,
Disguised cheaters, prating mountebanks,
And many such-like liberties of sin:
If it prove so, I will be gone the sooner.
I'll to the Centaur, to go seek this slave:
I greatly fear my money is not safe.
Exit
ACT II
SCENE I. The house of ANTIPHOLUS of Ephesus.
Enter ADRIANA and LUCIANA
Neither my husband nor the slave return'd,
That in such haste I sent to seek his master!
Sure, Luciana, it is two o'clock.
Perhaps some merchant hath invited him,
And from the mart he's somewhere gone to dinner.
Good sister, let us dine and never fret:
A man is master of his liberty:
Time is their master, and, when they see time,
They'll go or come: if so, be patient, sister.
Why should their liberty than ours be more?
Because their business still lies out o' door.
Look, when I serve him so, he takes it ill.
O, know he is the bridle of your will.
There's none but asses will be bridled so.
Why, headstrong liberty is lash'd with woe.
There's nothing situate under heaven's eye
But hath his bound, in earth, in sea, in sky:
The beasts, the fishes, and the winged fowls,
Are their males' subjects and at their controls:
Men, more divine, the masters of all these,
Lords of the wide world and wild watery seas,
Indued with intellectual sense and souls,
Of more preeminence than fish and fowls,
Are masters to their females, and their lords:
Then let your will attend on their accords.
This servitude makes you to keep unwed.
Not this, but troubles of the marriage-bed.
But, were you wedded, you would bear some sway.
Ere I learn love, I'll practise to obey.
How if your husband start some other where?
Till he come home again, I would forbear.
Patience unmoved! no marvel though she pause
They can be meek that have no other cause.
A wretched soul, bruised with adversity,
We bid be quiet when we hear it cry
But were we burdened with like weight of pain,
As much or more would we ourselves complain:
So thou, that hast no unkind mate to grieve thee,
With urging helpless patience wouldst relieve me,
But, if thou live to see like right bereft,
This fool-begg'd patience in thee will be left.
Well, I will marry one day, but to try.
Here comes your man
Enter DROMIO of Ephesus
Say, is your tardy master now at hand?
Nay, he's at two hands with me, and that my two ears
can witness.
Say, didst thou speak with him? know'st thou his mind?
Ay, ay, he told his mind upon mine ear:
Beshrew his hand, I scarce could understand it.
Spake he so doubtfully, thou couldst not feel his meaning?
Nay, he struck so plainly, I could too well feel his
blows
understand them.
But say, I prithee, is he coming home? It seems he
hath great care to please his wife.
Why, mistress, sure my master is horn-mad.
Horn-mad, thou villain!
I mean not cuckold-mad
But, sure, he is stark mad.
When I desired him to come home to dinner,
He ask'd me for a thousand marks in gold:
''Tis dinner-time,' quoth I
'Your meat doth burn,' quoth I
'Will you come home?' quoth I
'Where is the thousand marks I gave thee, villain?'
'The pig,' quoth I, 'is burn'd
'My mistress, sir' quoth I
I know not thy mistress
Quoth who?
Quoth my master:
'I know,' quoth he, 'no house, no wife, no mistress.'
So that my errand, due unto my tongue,
I thank him, I bare home upon my shoulders
For, in conclusion, he did beat me there.
Go back again, thou slave, and fetch him home.
Go back again, and be new beaten home?
For God's sake, send some other messenger.
Back, slave, or I will break thy pate across.
And he will bless that cross with other beating:
Between you I shall have a holy head.
Hence, prating peasant! fetch thy master home.
Am I so round with you as you with me,
That like a football you do spurn me thus?
You spurn me hence, and he will spurn me hither:
If I last in this service, you must case me in leather.
Exit
Fie, how impatience loureth in your face!
His company must do his minions grace,
Whilst I at home starve for a merry look.
Hath homely age the alluring beauty took
From my poor cheek? then he hath wasted it:
Are my discourses dull? barren my wit?
If voluble and sharp discourse be marr'd,
Unkindness blunts it more than marble hard:
Do their gay vestments his affections bait?
That's not my fault: he's master of my state:
What ruins are in me that can be found,
By him not ruin'd? then is he the ground
Of my defeatures. My decayed fair
A sunny look of his would soon repair
But, too unruly deer, he breaks the pale
And feeds from home
Self-harming jealousy! fie, beat it hence!
Unfeeling fools can with such wrongs dispense.
I know his eye doth homage otherwhere,
Or else what lets it but he would be here?
Sister, you know he promised me a chain
Would that alone, alone he would detain,
So he would keep fair quarter with his bed!
I see the jewel best enamelled
Will lose his beauty
That others touch, and often touching will
Wear gold: and no man that hath a name,
By falsehood and corruption doth it shame.
Since that my beauty cannot please his eye,
I'll weep what's left away, and weeping die.
How many fond fools serve mad jealousy!
Exeunt
SCENE II. A public place.
Enter ANTIPHOLUS of Syracuse
ANTIPHOLUS
The gold I gave to Dromio is laid up
Safe at the Centaur
Is wander'd forth, in care to seek me out
By computation and mine host's report.
I could not speak with Dromio since at first
I sent him from the mart. See, here he comes.
Enter DROMIO of Syracuse
How now sir! is your merry humour alter'd?
As you love strokes, so jest with me again.
You know no Centaur? you received no gold?
Your mistress sent to have me home to dinner?
My house was at the Phoenix? Wast thou mad,
That thus so madly thou didst answer me?
What answer, sir? when spake I such a word?
ANTIPHOLUS
Even now, even here, not half an hour since.
I did not see you since you sent me hence,
Home to the Centaur, with the gold you gave me.
ANTIPHOLUS
Villain, thou didst deny the gold's receipt,
And told'st me of a mistress and a dinner
For which, I hope, thou felt'st I was displeased.
I am glad to see you in this merry vein:
What means this jest? I pray you, master, tell me.
ANTIPHOLUS
Yea, dost thou jeer and flout me in the teeth?
Think'st thou I jest? Hold, take thou that, and that.
Beating him
Hold, sir, for God's sake! now your jest is earnest:
Upon what bargain do you give it me?
ANTIPHOLUS
Because that I familiarly sometimes
Do use you for my fool and chat with you,
Your sauciness will jest upon my love
And make a common of my serious hours.
When the sun shines let foolish gnats make sport,
But creep in crannies when he hides his beams.
If you will jest with me, know my aspect,
And fashion your demeanor to my looks,
Or I will beat this method in your sconce.
Sconce call you it? so you would leave battering, I
had rather have it a head: an you use these blows
long, I must get a sconce for my head and ensconce
it too
But, I pray, sir why am I beaten?
ANTIPHOLUS
Dost thou not know?
Nothing, sir, but that I am beaten.
ANTIPHOLUS
Shall I tell you why?
Ay, sir, and wherefore
a wherefore.
ANTIPHOLUS
Why, first,--for flouting me
For urging it the second time to me.
Was there ever any man thus beaten out of season,
When in the why and the wherefore is neither rhyme
nor reason?
Well, sir, I thank you.
ANTIPHOLUS
Thank me, sir, for what?
Marry, sir, for this something that you gave me for nothing.
ANTIPHOLUS
I'll make you amends next, to give you nothing for
something. But say, sir, is it dinner-time?
No, sir
ANTIPHOLUS
In good time, sir
Basting.
ANTIPHOLUS
Well, sir, then 'twill be dry.
If it be, sir, I pray you, eat none of it.
ANTIPHOLUS
Your reason?
Lest it make you choleric and purchase me another
dry basting.
ANTIPHOLUS
Well, sir, learn to jest in good time: there's a
time for all things.
I durst have denied that, before you were so choleric.
ANTIPHOLUS
By what rule, sir?
Marry, sir, by a rule as plain as the plain bald
pate of father Time himself.
ANTIPHOLUS
Let's hear it.
There's no time for a man to recover his hair that
grows bald by nature.
ANTIPHOLUS
May he not do it by fine and recovery?
Yes, to pay a fine for a periwig and recover the
lost hair of another man.
ANTIPHOLUS
Why is Time such a niggard of hair, being, as it is,
so plentiful an excrement?
Because it is a blessing that he bestows on beasts
and what he hath scanted men in hair he hath given them in wit.
ANTIPHOLUS
Why, but there's many a man hath more hair than wit.
Not a man of those but he hath the wit to lose his hair.
ANTIPHOLUS
Why, thou didst conclude hairy men plain dealers without wit.
The plainer dealer, the sooner lost: yet he loseth
it in a kind of jollity.
ANTIPHOLUS
For what reason?
For two
ANTIPHOLUS
Nay, not sound, I pray you.
Sure ones, then.
ANTIPHOLUS
Nay, not sure, in a thing falsing.
Certain ones then.
ANTIPHOLUS
Name them.
The one, to save the money that he spends in
trimming
drop in his porridge.
ANTIPHOLUS
You would all this time have proved there is no
time for all things.
Marry, and did, sir
lost by nature.
ANTIPHOLUS
But your reason was not substantial, why there is no
time to recover.
Thus I mend it: Time himself is bald and therefore
to the world's end will have bald followers.
ANTIPHOLUS
I knew 'twould be a bald conclusion:
But, soft! who wafts us yonder?
Enter ADRIANA and LUCIANA
Ay, ay, Antipholus, look strange and frown:
Some other mistress hath thy sweet aspects
I am not Adriana nor thy wife.
The time was once when thou unurged wouldst vow
That never words were music to thine ear,
That never object pleasing in thine eye,
That never touch well welcome to thy hand,
That never meat sweet-savor'd in thy taste,
Unless I spake, or look'd, or touch'd, or carved to thee.
How comes it now, my husband, O, how comes it,
That thou art thus estranged from thyself?
Thyself I call it, being strange to me,
That, undividable, incorporate,
Am better than thy dear self's better part.
Ah, do not tear away thyself from me!
For know, my love, as easy mayest thou fall
A drop of water in the breaking gulf,
And take unmingled that same drop again,
Without addition or diminishing,
As take from me thyself and not me too.
How dearly would it touch me to the quick,
Shouldst thou but hear I were licentious
And that this body, consecrate to thee,
By ruffian lust should be contaminate!
Wouldst thou not spit at me and spurn at me
And hurl the name of husband in my face
And tear the stain'd skin off my harlot-brow
And from my false hand cut the wedding-ring
And break it with a deep-divorcing vow?
I know thou canst
I am possess'd with an adulterate blot
My blood is mingled with the crime of lust:
For if we too be one and thou play false,
I do digest the poison of thy flesh,
Being strumpeted by thy contagion.
Keep then far league and truce with thy true bed
I live unstain'd, thou undishonoured.
ANTIPHOLUS
Plead you to me, fair dame? I know you not:
In Ephesus I am but two hours old,
As strange unto your town as to your talk
Who, every word by all my wit being scann'd,
Want wit in all one word to understand.
Fie, brother! how the world is changed with you!
When were you wont to use my sister thus?
She sent for you by Dromio home to dinner.
ANTIPHOLUS
By Dromio?
By me?
By thee
That he did buffet thee, and, in his blows,
Denied my house for his, me for his wife.
ANTIPHOLUS
Did you converse, sir, with this gentlewoman?
What is the course and drift of your compact?
I, sir? I never saw her till this time.
ANTIPHOLUS
Villain, thou liest
Didst thou deliver to me on the mart.
I never spake with her in all my life.
ANTIPHOLUS
How can she thus then call us by our names,
Unless it be by inspiration.
How ill agrees it with your gravity
To counterfeit thus grossly with your slave,
Abetting him to thwart me in my mood!
Be it my wrong you are from me exempt,
But wrong not that wrong with a more contempt.
Come, I will fasten on this sleeve of thine:
Thou art an elm, my husband, I a vine,
Whose weakness, married to thy stronger state,
Makes me with thy strength to communicate:
If aught possess thee from me, it is dross,
Usurping ivy, brier, or idle moss
Who, all for want of pruning, with intrusion
Infect thy sap and live on thy confusion.
ANTIPHOLUS
To me she speaks
What, was I married to her in my dream?
Or sleep I now and think I hear all this?
What error drives our eyes and ears amiss?
Until I know this sure uncertainty,
I'll entertain the offer'd fallacy.
Dromio, go bid the servants spread for dinner.
O, for my beads! I cross me for a sinner.
This is the fairy land: O spite of spites!
We talk with goblins, owls and sprites:
If we obey them not, this will ensue,
They'll suck our breath, or pinch us black and blue.
Why pratest thou to thyself and answer'st not?
Dromio, thou drone, thou snail, thou slug, thou sot!
I am transformed, master, am I not?
ANTIPHOLUS
I think thou art in mind, and so am I.
Nay, master, both in mind and in my shape.
ANTIPHOLUS
Thou hast thine own form.
No, I am an ape.
If thou art changed to aught, 'tis to an ass.
'Tis true
'Tis so, I am an ass
But I should know her as well as she knows me.
Come, come, no longer will I be a fool,
To put the finger in the eye and weep,
Whilst man and master laugh my woes to scorn.
Come, sir, to dinner. Dromio, keep the gate.
Husband, I'll dine above with you to-day
And shrive you of a thousand idle pranks.
Sirrah, if any ask you for your master,
Say he dines forth, and let no creature enter.
Come, sister. Dromio, play the porter well.
ANTIPHOLUS
Am I in earth, in heaven, or in hell?
Sleeping or waking? mad or well-advised?
Known unto these, and to myself disguised!
I'll say as they say and persever so,
And in this mist at all adventures go.
Master, shall I be porter at the gate?
Ay
Come, come, Antipholus, we dine too late.
Exeunt
ACT III
SCENE I. Before the house of ANTIPHOLUS of Ephesus.
Enter ANTIPHOLUS of Ephesus, DROMIO of Ephesus, ANGELO, and BALTHAZAR
ANTIPHOLUS
Good Signior Angelo, you must excuse us all
My wife is shrewish when I keep not hours:
Say that I linger'd with you at your shop
To see the making of her carcanet,
And that to-morrow you will bring it home.
But here's a villain that would face me down
He met me on the mart, and that I beat him,
And charged him with a thousand marks in gold,
And that I did deny my wife and house.
Thou drunkard, thou, what didst thou mean by this?
Say what you will, sir, but I know what I know
That you beat me at the mart, I have your hand to show:
If the skin were parchment, and the blows you gave were ink,
Your own handwriting would tell you what I think.
ANTIPHOLUS
I think thou art an ass.
Marry, so it doth appear
By the wrongs I suffer and the blows I bear.
I should kick, being kick'd
You would keep from my heels and beware of an ass.
ANTIPHOLUS
You're sad, Signior Balthazar: pray God our cheer
May answer my good will and your good welcome here.
I hold your dainties cheap, sir, and your
welcome dear.
ANTIPHOLUS
O, Signior Balthazar, either at flesh or fish,
A table full of welcome make scarce one dainty dish.
Good meat, sir, is common
ANTIPHOLUS
And welcome more common
Small cheer and great welcome makes a merry feast.
ANTIPHOLUS
Ay, to a niggardly host, and more sparing guest:
But though my cates be mean, take them in good part
Better cheer may you have, but not with better heart.
But, soft! my door is lock'd. Go bid them let us in.
Maud, Bridget, Marian, Cicel, Gillian, Ginn!
[Within]  Mome, malt-horse, capon, coxcomb,
idiot, patch!
Either get thee from the door, or sit down at the hatch.
Dost thou conjure for wenches, that thou call'st
for such store,
When one is one too many? Go, get thee from the door.
What patch is made our porter? My master stays in
the street.
[Within]  Let him walk from whence he came, lest he
catch cold on's feet.
ANTIPHOLUS
Who talks within there? ho, open the door!
[Within]  Right, sir
me wherefore.
ANTIPHOLUS
Wherefore? for my dinner: I have not dined to-day.
[Within]  Nor to-day here you must not
when you may.
ANTIPHOLUS
What art thou that keepest me out from the house I owe?
[Within]  The porter for this time, sir, and my name
is Dromio.
O villain! thou hast stolen both mine office and my name.
The one ne'er got me credit, the other mickle blame.
If thou hadst been Dromio to-day in my place,
Thou wouldst have changed thy face for a name or thy
name for an ass.
[Within]  What a coil is there, Dromio? who are those
at the gate?
Let my master in, Luce.
[Within]  Faith, no
And so tell your master.
O Lord, I must laugh!
Have at you with a proverb--Shall I set in my staff?
[Within]  Have at you with another
can you tell?
[Within]  If thy name be call'd Luce--Luce, thou hast
answered him well.
Do you hear, you minion? you'll let us in, I hope?
OF EPHESUS
[Within]  I thought to have asked you.
[Within]  And you said no.
So, come, help: well struck! there was blow for blow.
ANTIPHOLUS
Thou baggage, let me in.
[Within]  Can you tell for whose sake?
Master, knock the door hard.
[Within]  Let him knock till it ache.
ANTIPHOLUS
You'll cry for this, minion, if I beat the door down.
[Within]  What needs all that, and a pair of stocks in the town?
[Within]  Who is that at the door that keeps all
this noise?
[Within]  By my troth, your town is troubled with
unruly boys.
ANTIPHOLUS
Are you there, wife? you might have come before.
[Within]  Your wife, sir knave! go get you from the door.
If you went in pain, master, this 'knave' would go sore.
Here is neither cheer, sir, nor welcome: we would
fain have either.
In debating which was best, we shall part with neither.
They stand at the door, master
ANTIPHOLUS
There is something in the wind, that we cannot get in.
You would say so, master, if your garments were thin.
Your cake there is warm within
It would make a man mad as a buck, to be so bought and sold.
ANTIPHOLUS
Go fetch me something: I'll break ope the gate.
[Within]  Break any breaking here, and I'll break your
knave's pate.
A man may break a word with you, sir, and words are but wind,
Ay, and break it in your face, so he break it not behind.
[Within]  It seems thou want'st breaking: out upon
thee, hind!
Here's too much 'out upon thee!' I pray thee,
let me in.
[Within]  Ay, when fowls have no feathers and fish have no fin.
ANTIPHOLUS
Well, I'll break in: go borrow me a crow.
A crow without feather? Master, mean you so?
For a fish without a fin, there's a fowl without a feather
If a crow help us in, sirrah, we'll pluck a crow together.
ANTIPHOLUS
Go get thee gone
Have patience, sir
Herein you war against your reputation
And draw within the compass of suspect
The unviolated honour of your wife.
Once this,--your long experience of her wisdom,
Her sober virtue, years and modesty,
Plead on her part some cause to you unknown:
And doubt not, sir, but she will well excuse
Why at this time the doors are made against you.
Be ruled by me: depart in patience,
And let us to the Tiger all to dinner,
And about evening come yourself alone
To know the reason of this strange restraint.
If by strong hand you offer to break in
Now in the stirring passage of the day,
A vulgar comment will be made of it,
And that supposed by the common rout
Against your yet ungalled estimation
That may with foul intrusion enter in
And dwell upon your grave when you are dead
For slander lives upon succession,
For ever housed where it gets possession.
ANTIPHOLUS
You have prevailed: I will depart in quiet,
And, in despite of mirth, mean to be merry.
I know a wench of excellent discourse,
Pretty and witty
There will we dine. This woman that I mean,
My wife--but, I protest, without desert--
Hath oftentimes upbraided me withal:
To her will we to dinner.
To Angelo
Get you home
And fetch the chain
Bring it, I pray you, to the Porpentine
For there's the house: that chain will I bestow--
Be it for nothing but to spite my wife--
Upon mine hostess there: good sir, make haste.
Since mine own doors refuse to entertain me,
I'll knock elsewhere, to see if they'll disdain me.
I'll meet you at that place some hour hence.
ANTIPHOLUS
Do so. This jest shall cost me some expense.
Exeunt
SCENE II. The same.
Enter LUCIANA and ANTIPHOLUS of Syracuse
And may it be that you have quite forgot
A husband's office? shall, Antipholus.
Even in the spring of love, thy love-springs rot?
Shall love, in building, grow so ruinous?
If you did wed my sister for her wealth,
Then for her wealth's sake use her with more kindness:
Or if you like elsewhere, do it by stealth
Muffle your false love with some show of blindness:
Let not my sister read it in your eye
Be not thy tongue thy own shame's orator
Look sweet, be fair, become disloyalty
Apparel vice like virtue's harbinger
Bear a fair presence, though your heart be tainted
Teach sin the carriage of a holy saint
Be secret-false: what need she be acquainted?
What simple thief brags of his own attaint?
'Tis double wrong, to truant with your bed
And let her read it in thy looks at board:
Shame hath a bastard fame, well managed
Ill d eeds are doubled with an evil word.
Alas, poor women! make us but believe,
Being compact of credit, that you love us
Though others have the arm, show us the sleeve
We in your motion turn and you may move us.
Then, gentle brother, get you in again
Comfort my sister, cheer her, call her wife:
'Tis holy sport to be a little vain,
When the sweet breath of flattery conquers strife.
ANTIPHOLUS
Sweet mistress--what your name is else, I know not,
Nor by what wonder you do hit of mine,--
Less in your knowledge and your grace you show not
Than our earth's wonder, more than earth divine.
Teach me, dear creature, how to think and speak
Lay open to my earthy-gross conceit,
Smother'd in errors, feeble, shallow, weak,
The folded meaning of your words' deceit.
Against my soul's pure truth why labour you
To make it wander in an unknown field?
Are you a god? would you create me new?
Transform me then, and to your power I'll yield.
But if that I am I, then well I know
Your weeping sister is no wife of mine,
Nor to her bed no homage do I owe
Far more, far more to you do I decline.
O, train me not, sweet mermaid, with thy note,
To drown me in thy sister's flood of tears:
Sing, siren, for thyself and I will dote:
Spread o'er the silver waves thy golden hairs,
And as a bed I'll take them and there lie,
And in that glorious supposition think
He gains by death that hath such means to die:
Let Love, being light, be drowned if she sink!
What, are you mad, that you do reason so?
ANTIPHOLUS
Not mad, but mated
It is a fault that springeth from your eye.
ANTIPHOLUS
For gazing on your beams, fair sun, being by.
Gaze where you should, and that will clear your sight.
ANTIPHOLUS
As good to wink, sweet love, as look on night.
Why call you me love? call my sister so.
ANTIPHOLUS
Thy sister's sister.
That's my sister.
ANTIPHOLUS
No
It is thyself, mine own self's better part,
Mine eye's clear eye, my dear heart's dearer heart,
My food, my fortune and my sweet hope's aim,
My sole earth's heaven and my heaven's claim.
All this my sister is, or else should be.
ANTIPHOLUS
Call thyself sister, sweet, for I am thee.
Thee will I love and with thee lead my life:
Thou hast no husband yet nor I no wife.
Give me thy hand.
O, soft, air! hold you still:
I'll fetch my sister, to get her good will.
Exit
Enter DROMIO of Syracuse
ANTIPHOLUS
Why, how now, Dromio! where runn'st thou so fast?
Do you know me, sir? am I Dromio? am I your man?
am I myself?
ANTIPHOLUS
Thou art Dromio, thou art my man, thou art thyself.
I am an ass, I am a woman's man and besides myself.
What woman's man? and how besides thyself? besides thyself?
Marry, sir, besides myself, I am due to a woman
that claims me, one that haunts me, one that will have me.
ANTIPHOLUS
What claim lays she to thee?
Marry sir, such claim as you would lay to your
horse
being a beast, she would have me
being a very beastly creature, lays claim to me.
ANTIPHOLUS
What is she?
A very reverent body
not speak of without he say 'Sir-reverence.' I have
but lean luck in the match, and yet is she a
wondrous fat marriage.
ANTIPHOLUS
How dost thou mean a fat marriage?
Marry, sir, she's the kitchen wench and all grease
and I know not what use to put her to but to make a
lamp of her and run from her by her own light. I
warrant, her rags and the tallow in them will burn a
Poland winter: if she lives till doomsday,
she'll burn a week longer than the whole world.
ANTIPHOLUS
What complexion is she of?
Swart, like my shoe, but her face nothing half so
clean kept: for why, she sweats
shoes in the grime of it.
ANTIPHOLUS
That's a fault that water will mend.
No, sir, 'tis in grain
ANTIPHOLUS
What's her name?
Nell, sir
an ell and three quarters, will not measure her from
hip to hip.
ANTIPHOLUS
Then she bears some breadth?
No longer from head to foot than from hip to hip:
she is spherical, like a globe
countries in her.
ANTIPHOLUS
In what part of her body stands Ireland?
Marry, in her buttocks: I found it out by the bogs.
ANTIPHOLUS
Where Scotland?
I found it by the barrenness
ANTIPHOLUS
Where France?
In her forehead
against her heir.
ANTIPHOLUS
Where England?
I looked for the chalky cliffs, but I could find no
whiteness in them
by the salt rheum that ran between France and it.
ANTIPHOLUS
Where Spain?
Faith, I saw it not
ANTIPHOLUS
Where America, the Indies?
Oh, sir, upon her nose all o'er embellished with
rubies, carbuncles, sapphires, declining their rich
aspect to the hot breath of Spain
armadoes of caracks to be ballast at her nose.
ANTIPHOLUS
Where stood Belgia, the Netherlands?
Oh, sir, I did not look so low. To conclude, this
drudge, or diviner, laid claim to me, call'd me
Dromio
privy marks I had about me, as, the mark of my
shoulder, the mole in my neck, the great wart on my
left arm, that I amazed ran from her as a witch:
And, I think, if my breast had not been made of
faith and my heart of steel,
She had transform'd me to a curtal dog and made
me turn i' the wheel.
ANTIPHOLUS
Go hie thee presently, post to the road:
An if the wind blow any way from shore,
I will not harbour in this town to-night:
If any bark put forth, come to the mart,
Where I will walk till thou return to me.
If every one knows us and we know none,
'Tis time, I think, to trudge, pack and be gone.
As from a bear a man would run for life,
So fly I from her that would be my wife.
Exit
ANTIPHOLUS
There's none but witches do inhabit here
And therefore 'tis high time that I were hence.
She that doth call me husband, even my soul
Doth for a wife abhor. But her fair sister,
Possess'd with such a gentle sovereign grace,
Of such enchanting presence and discourse,
Hath almost made me traitor to myself:
But, lest myself be guilty to self-wrong,
I'll stop mine ears against the mermaid's song.
Enter ANGELO with the chain
Master Antipholus,--
ANTIPHOLUS
Ay, that's my name.
I know it well, sir, lo, here is the chain.
I thought to have ta'en you at the Porpentine:
The chain unfinish'd made me stay thus long.
ANTIPHOLUS
What is your will that I shall do with this?
What please yourself, sir: I have made it for you.
ANTIPHOLUS
Made it for me, sir! I bespoke it not.
Not once, nor twice, but twenty times you have.
Go home with it and please your wife withal
And soon at supper-time I'll visit you
And then receive my money for the chain.
ANTIPHOLUS
I pray you, sir, receive the money now,
For fear you ne'er see chain nor money more.
You are a merry man, sir: fare you well.
Exit
ANTIPHOLUS
What I should think of this, I cannot tell:
But this I think, there's no man is so vain
That would refuse so fair an offer'd chain.
I see a man here needs not live by shifts,
When in the streets he meets such golden gifts.
I'll to the mart, and there for Dromio stay
If any ship put out, then straight away.
Exit
ACT IV
SCENE I. A public place.
Enter Second Merchant, ANGELO, and an Officer
You know since Pentecost the sum is due,
And since I have not much importuned you
Nor now I had not, but that I am bound
To Persia, and want guilders for my voyage:
Therefore make present satisfaction,
Or I'll attach you by this officer.
Even just the sum that I do owe to you
Is growing to me by Antipholus,
And in the instant that I met with you
He had of me a chain: at five o'clock
I shall receive the money for the same.
Pleaseth you walk with me down to his house,
I will discharge my bond and thank you too.
Enter ANTIPHOLUS of Ephesus and DROMIO of Ephesus from the courtezan's
That labour may you save: see where he comes.
ANTIPHOLUS
While I go to the goldsmith's house, go thou
And buy a rope's end: that will I bestow
Among my wife and her confederates,
For locking me out of my doors by day.
But, soft! I see the goldsmith. Get thee gone
Buy thou a rope and bring it home to me.
I buy a thousand pound a year: I buy a rope.
Exit
ANTIPHOLUS
A man is well holp up that trusts to you:
I promised your presence and the chain
But neither chain nor goldsmith came to me.
Belike you thought our love would last too long,
If it were chain'd together, and therefore came not.
Saving your merry humour, here's the note
How much your chain weighs to the utmost carat,
The fineness of the gold and chargeful fashion.
Which doth amount to three odd ducats more
Than I stand debted to this gentleman:
I pray you, see him presently discharged,
For he is bound to sea and stays but for it.
ANTIPHOLUS
I am not furnish'd with the present money
Besides, I have some business in the town.
Good signior, take the stranger to my house
And with you take the chain and bid my wife
Disburse the sum on the receipt thereof:
Perchance I will be there as soon as you.
Then you will bring the chain to her yourself?
ANTIPHOLUS
No
Well, sir, I will. Have you the chain about you?
ANTIPHOLUS
An if I have not, sir, I hope you have
Or else you may return without your money.
Nay, come, I pray you, sir, give me the chain:
Both wind and tide stays for this gentleman,
And I, to blame, have held him here too long.
ANTIPHOLUS
Good Lord! you use this dalliance to excuse
Your breach of promise to the Porpentine.
I should have chid you for not bringing it,
But, like a shrew, you first begin to brawl.
The hour steals on
You hear how he importunes me
ANTIPHOLUS
Why, give it to my wife and fetch your money.
Come, come, you know I gave it you even now.
Either send the chain or send me by some token.
ANTIPHOLUS
Fie, now you run this humour out of breath,
where's the chain? I pray you, let me see it.
My business cannot brook this dalliance.
Good sir, say whether you'll answer me or no:
If not, I'll leave him to the officer.
ANTIPHOLUS
I answer you! what should I answer you?
The money that you owe me for the chain.
ANTIPHOLUS
I owe you none till I receive the chain.
You know I gave it you half an hour since.
ANTIPHOLUS
You gave me none: you wrong me much to say so.
You wrong me more, sir, in denying it:
Consider how it stands upon my credit.
Well, officer, arrest him at my suit.
I do
This touches me in reputation.
Either consent to pay this sum for me
Or I attach you by this officer.
ANTIPHOLUS
Consent to pay thee that I never had!
Arrest me, foolish fellow, if thou darest.
Here is thy fee
I would not spare my brother in this case,
If he should scorn me so apparently.
I do arrest you, sir: you hear the suit.
ANTIPHOLUS
I do obey thee till I give thee bail.
But, sirrah, you shall buy this sport as dear
As all the metal in your shop will answer.
Sir, sir, I will have law in Ephesus,
To your notorious shame
Enter DROMIO of Syracuse, from the bay
Master, there is a bark of Epidamnum
That stays but till her owner comes aboard,
And then, sir, she bears away. Our fraughtage, sir,
I have convey'd aboard
The oil, the balsamum and aqua-vitae.
The ship is in her trim
Blows fair from land: they stay for nought at all
But for their owner, master, and yourself.
ANTIPHOLUS
How now! a madman! Why, thou peevish sheep,
What ship of Epidamnum stays for me?
A ship you sent me to, to hire waftage.
ANTIPHOLUS
Thou drunken slave, I sent thee for a rope
And told thee to what purpose and what end.
You sent me for a rope's end as soon:
You sent me to the bay, sir, for a bark.
ANTIPHOLUS
I will debate this matter at more leisure
And teach your ears to list me with more heed.
To Adriana, villain, hie thee straight:
Give her this key, and tell her, in the desk
That's cover'd o'er with Turkish tapestry,
There is a purse of ducats
Tell her I am arrested in the street
And that shall bail me
On, officer, to prison till it come.
Exeunt Second Merchant, Angelo, Officer, and Antipholus of Ephesus
To Adriana! that is where we dined,
Where Dowsabel did claim me for her husband:
She is too big, I hope, for me to compass.
Thither I must, although against my will,
For servants must their masters' minds fulfil.
Exit
SCENE II. The house of ANTIPHOLUS of Ephesus.
Enter ADRIANA and LUCIANA
Ah, Luciana, did he tempt thee so?
Mightst thou perceive austerely in his eye
That he did plead in earnest? yea or no?
Look'd he or red or pale, or sad or merrily?
What observation madest thou in this case
Of his heart's meteors tilting in his face?
First he denied you had in him no right.
He meant he did me none
Then swore he that he was a stranger here.
And true he swore, though yet forsworn he were.
Then pleaded I for you.
And what said he?
That love I begg'd for you he begg'd of me.
With what persuasion did he tempt thy love?
With words that in an honest suit might move.
First he did praise my beauty, then my speech.
Didst speak him fair?
Have patience, I beseech.
I cannot, nor I will not, hold me still
My tongue, though not my heart, shall have his will.
He is deformed, crooked, old and sere,
Ill-faced, worse bodied, shapeless everywhere
Vicious, ungentle, foolish, blunt, unkind
Stigmatical in making, worse in mind.
Who would be jealous then of such a one?
No evil lost is wail'd when it is gone.
Ah, but I think him better than I say,
And yet would herein others' eyes were worse.
Far from her nest the lapwing cries away:
My heart prays for him, though my tongue do curse.
Enter DROMIO of Syracuse
Here! go
How hast thou lost thy breath?
By running fast.
Where is thy master, Dromio? is he well?
No, he's in Tartar limbo, worse than hell.
A devil in an everlasting garment hath him
One whose hard heart is button'd up with steel
A fiend, a fury, pitiless and rough
A wolf, nay, worse, a fellow all in buff
A back-friend, a shoulder-clapper, one that
countermands
The passages of alleys, creeks and narrow lands
A hound that runs counter and yet draws dryfoot well
One that before the judgement carries poor souls to hell.
Why, man, what is the matter?
I do not know the matter: he is 'rested on the case.
What, is he arrested? Tell me at whose suit.
I know not at whose suit he is arrested well
But he's in a suit of buff which 'rested him, that can I tell.
Will you send him, mistress, redemption, the money in his desk?
Go fetch it, sister.
Exit Luciana
This I wonder at,
That he, unknown to me, should be in debt.
Tell me, was he arrested on a band?
Not on a band, but on a stronger thing
A chain, a chain! Do you not hear it ring?
What, the chain?
No, no, the bell: 'tis time that I were gone:
It was two ere I left him, and now the clock
strikes one.
The hours come back! that did I never hear.
O, yes
very fear.
As if Time were in debt! how fondly dost thou reason!
Time is a very bankrupt, and owes more than he's
worth, to season.
Nay, he's a thief too: have you not heard men say
That Time comes stealing on by night and day?
If Time be in debt and theft, and a sergeant in the way,
Hath he not reason to turn back an hour in a day?
Re-enter LUCIANA with a purse
Go, Dromio
And bring thy master home immediately.
Come, sister: I am press'd down with conceit--
Conceit, my comfort and my injury.
Exeunt
SCENE III. A public place.
Enter ANTIPHOLUS of Syracuse
ANTIPHOLUS
There's not a man I meet but doth salute me
As if I were their well-acquainted friend
And every one doth call me by my name.
Some tender money to me
Some other give me thanks for kindnesses
Some offer me commodities to buy:
Even now a tailor call'd me in his shop
And show'd me silks that he had bought for me,
And therewithal took measure of my body.
Sure, these are but imaginary wiles
And Lapland sorcerers inhabit here.
Enter DROMIO OF SYRACUSE
Master, here's the gold you sent me for. What, have
you got the picture of old Adam new-apparelled?
ANTIPHOLUS
What gold is this? what Adam dost thou mean?
Not that Adam that kept the Paradise but that Adam
that keeps the prison: he that goes in the calf's
skin that was killed for the Prodigal
behind you, sir, like an evil angel, and bid you
forsake your liberty.
ANTIPHOLUS
I understand thee not.
No? why, 'tis a plain case: he that went, like a
bass-viol, in a case of leather
that, when gentlemen are tired, gives them a sob
and 'rests them
men and gives them suits of durance
his rest to do more exploits with his mace than a
morris-pike.
ANTIPHOLUS
What, thou meanest an officer?
Ay, sir, the sergeant of the band, he that brings
any man to answer it that breaks his band
thinks a man always going to bed, and says, 'God
give you good rest!'
ANTIPHOLUS
Well, sir, there rest in your foolery. Is there any
Why, sir, I brought you word an hour since that the
bark Expedition put forth to-night
you hindered by the sergeant, to tarry for the hoy
Delay. Here are the angels that you sent for to
deliver you.
ANTIPHOLUS
The fellow is distract, and so am I
And here we wander in illusions:
Some blessed power deliver us from hence!
Enter a Courtezan
Well met, well met, Master Antipholus.
I see, sir, you have found the goldsmith now:
Is that the chain you promised me to-day?
ANTIPHOLUS
Satan, avoid! I charge thee, tempt me not.
Master, is this Mistress Satan?
ANTIPHOLUS
It is the devil.
Nay, she is worse, she is the devil's dam
she comes in the habit of a light wench: and thereof
comes that the wenches say 'God damn me
much to say 'God make me a light wench.' It is
written, they appear to men like angels of light:
light is an effect of fire, and fire will burn
ergo, light wenches will burn. Come not near her.
Your man and you are marvellous merry, sir.
Will you go with me? We'll mend our dinner here?
Master, if you do, expect spoon-meat
long spoon.
ANTIPHOLUS
Why, Dromio?
Marry, he must have a long spoon that must eat with
the devil.
ANTIPHOLUS
Avoid then, fiend! what tell'st thou me of supping?
Thou art, as you are all, a sorceress:
I conjure thee to leave me and be gone.
Give me the ring of mine you had at dinner,
Or, for my diamond, the chain you promised,
And I'll be gone, sir, and not trouble you.
Some devils ask but the parings of one's nail,
A rush, a hair, a drop of blood, a pin,
A nut, a cherry-stone
But she, more covetous, would have a chain.
Master, be wise: an if you give it her,
The devil will shake her chain and fright us with it.
I pray you, sir, my ring, or else the chain:
I hope you do not mean to cheat me so.
ANTIPHOLUS
Avaunt, thou witch! Come, Dromio, let us go.
'Fly pride,' says the peacock: mistress, that you know.
Exeunt Antipholus of Syracuse and Dromio of Syracuse
Now, out of doubt Antipholus is mad,
Else would he never so demean himself.
A ring he hath of mine worth forty ducats,
And for the same he promised me a chain:
Both one and other he denies me now.
The reason that I gather he is mad,
Besides this present instance of his rage,
Is a mad tale he told to-day at dinner,
Of his own doors being shut against his entrance.
Belike his wife, acquainted with his fits,
On purpose shut the doors against his way.
My way is now to hie home to his house,
And tell his wife that, being lunatic,
He rush'd into my house and took perforce
My ring away. This course I fittest choose
For forty ducats is too much to lose.
Exit
SCENE IV. A street.
Enter ANTIPHOLUS of Ephesus and the Officer
ANTIPHOLUS
Fear me not, man
I'll give thee, ere I leave thee, so much money,
To warrant thee, as I am 'rested for.
My wife is in a wayward mood to-day,
And will not lightly trust the messenger
That I should be attach'd in Ephesus,
I tell you, 'twill sound harshly in her ears.
Enter DROMIO of Ephesus with a rope's-end
Here comes my man
How now, sir! have you that I sent you for?
Here's that, I warrant you, will pay them all.
ANTIPHOLUS
But where's the money?
Why, sir, I gave the money for the rope.
ANTIPHOLUS
Five hundred ducats, villain, for a rope?
I'll serve you, sir, five hundred at the rate.
ANTIPHOLUS
To what end did I bid thee hie thee home?
To a rope's-end, sir
ANTIPHOLUS
And to that end, sir, I will welcome you.
Beating him
Good sir, be patient.
Nay, 'tis for me to be patient
Good, now, hold thy tongue.
Nay, rather persuade him to hold his hands.
ANTIPHOLUS
Thou whoreson, senseless villain!
I would I were senseless, sir, that I might not feel
your blows.
Thou art sensible in nothing but blows, and so is an
ass.
I am an ass, indeed
ears. I have served him from the hour of my
nativity to this instant, and have nothing at his
hands for my service but blows. When I am cold, he
heats me with beating
with beating
raised with it when I sit
it when I go from home
I return
beggar wont her brat
lamed me, I shall beg with it from door to door.
ANTIPHOLUS
Come, go along
Enter ADRIANA, LUCIANA, the Courtezan, and PINCH
Mistress, 'respice finem,' respect your end
rather, the prophecy like the parrot, 'beware the
rope's-end.'
ANTIPHOLUS
Wilt thou still talk?
Beating him
How say you now? is not your husband mad?
His incivility confirms no less.
Good Doctor Pinch, you are a conjurer
Establish him in his true sense again,
And I will please you what you will demand.
Alas, how fiery and how sharp he looks!
Mark how he trembles in his ecstasy!
Give me your hand and let me feel your pulse.
ANTIPHOLUS
There is my hand, and let it feel your ear.
Striking him
I charge thee, Satan, housed within this man,
To yield possession to my holy prayers
And to thy state of darkness hie thee straight:
I conjure thee by all the saints in heaven!
ANTIPHOLUS
Peace, doting wizard, peace! I am not mad.
O, that thou wert not, poor distressed soul!
ANTIPHOLUS
You minion, you, are these your customers?
Did this companion with the saffron face
Revel and feast it at my house to-day,
Whilst upon me the guilty doors were shut
And I denied to enter in my house?
O husband, God doth know you dined at home
Where would you had remain'd until this time,
Free from these slanders and this open shame!
ANTIPHOLUS
Dined at home! Thou villain, what sayest thou?
Sir, sooth to say, you did not dine at home.
ANTIPHOLUS
Were not my doors lock'd up and I shut out?
Perdie, your doors were lock'd and you shut out.
ANTIPHOLUS
And did not she herself revile me there?
Sans fable, she herself reviled you there.
ANTIPHOLUS
Did not her kitchen-maid rail, taunt, and scorn me?
Certes, she did
ANTIPHOLUS
And did not I in rage depart from thence?
In verity you did
That since have felt the vigour of his rage.
Is't good to soothe him in these contraries?
It is no shame: the fellow finds his vein,
And yielding to him humours well his frenzy.
ANTIPHOLUS
Thou hast suborn'd the goldsmith to arrest me.
Alas, I sent you money to redeem you,
By Dromio here, who came in haste for it.
Money by me! heart and goodwill you might
But surely master, not a rag of money.
ANTIPHOLUS
Went'st not thou to her for a purse of ducats?
He came to me and I deliver'd it.
And I am witness with her that she did.
God and the rope-maker bear me witness
That I was sent for nothing but a rope!
Mistress, both man and master is possess'd
I know it by their pale and deadly looks:
They must be bound and laid in some dark room.
ANTIPHOLUS
Say, wherefore didst thou lock me forth to-day?
And why dost thou deny the bag of gold?
I did not, gentle husband, lock thee forth.
And, gentle master, I received no gold
But I confess, sir, that we were lock'd out.
Dissembling villain, thou speak'st false in both.
ANTIPHOLUS
Dissembling harlot, thou art false in all
And art confederate with a damned pack
To make a loathsome abject scorn of me:
But with these nails I'll pluck out these false eyes
That would behold in me this shameful sport.
Enter three or four, and offer to bind him. He strives
O, bind him, bind him! let him not come near me.
More company! The fiend is strong within him.
Ay me, poor man, how pale and wan he looks!
ANTIPHOLUS
What, will you murder me? Thou gaoler, thou,
I am thy prisoner: wilt thou suffer them
To make a rescue?
Masters, let him go
He is my prisoner, and you shall not have him.
Go bind this man, for he is frantic too.
They offer to bind Dromio of Ephesus
What wilt thou do, thou peevish officer?
Hast thou delight to see a wretched man
Do outrage and displeasure to himself?
He is my prisoner: if I let him go,
The debt he owes will be required of me.
I will discharge thee ere I go from thee:
Bear me forthwith unto his creditor,
And, knowing how the debt grows, I will pay it.
Good master doctor, see him safe convey'd
Home to my house. O most unhappy day!
ANTIPHOLUS
O most unhappy strumpet!
Master, I am here entered in bond for you.
ANTIPHOLUS
Out on thee, villain! wherefore dost thou mad me?
Will you be bound for nothing? be mad, good master:
cry 'The devil!'
God help, poor souls, how idly do they talk!
Go bear him hence. Sister, go you with me.
Exeunt all but Adriana, Luciana, Officer and Courtezan
Say now, whose suit is he arrested at?
One Angelo, a goldsmith: do you know him?
I know the man. What is the sum he owes?
Two hundred ducats.
Say, how grows it due?
Due for a chain your husband had of him.
He did bespeak a chain for me, but had it not.
When as your husband all in rage to-day
Came to my house and took away my ring--
The ring I saw upon his finger now--
Straight after did I meet him with a chain.
It may be so, but I did never see it.
Come, gaoler, bring me where the goldsmith is:
I long to know the truth hereof at large.
Enter ANTIPHOLUS of Syracuse with his rapier drawn, and DROMIO of Syracuse
God, for thy mercy! they are loose again.
And come with naked swords.
Let's call more help to have them bound again.
Away! they'll kill us.
Exeunt all but Antipholus of Syracuse and Dromio of Syracuse
ANTIPHOLUS
I see these witches are afraid of swords.
She that would be your wife now ran from you.
ANTIPHOLUS
Come to the Centaur
I long that we were safe and sound aboard.
Faith, stay here this night
no harm: you saw they speak us fair, give us gold:
methinks they are such a gentle nation that, but for
the mountain of mad flesh that claims marriage of
me, I could find in my heart to stay here still and
turn witch.
ANTIPHOLUS
I will not stay to-night for all the town
Therefore away, to get our stuff aboard.
Exeunt
ACT V
SCENE I. A street before a Priory.
Enter Second Merchant and ANGELO
I am sorry, sir, that I have hinder'd you
But, I protest, he had the chain of me,
Though most dishonestly he doth deny it.
How is the man esteemed here in the city?
Of very reverend reputation, sir,
Of credit infinite, highly beloved,
Second to none that lives here in the city:
His word might bear my wealth at any time.
Speak softly
Enter ANTIPHOLUS of Syracuse and DROMIO of Syracuse
'Tis so
Which he forswore most monstrously to have.
Good sir, draw near to me, I'll speak to him.
Signior Antipholus, I wonder much
That you would put me to this shame and trouble
And, not without some scandal to yourself,
With circumstance and oaths so to deny
This chain which now you wear so openly:
Beside the charge, the shame, imprisonment,
You have done wrong to this my honest friend,
Who, but for staying on our controversy,
Had hoisted sail and put to sea to-day:
This chain you had of me
ANTIPHOLUS
I think I had
Yes, that you did, sir, and forswore it too.
ANTIPHOLUS
Who heard me to deny it or forswear it?
These ears of mine, thou know'st did hear thee.
Fie on thee, wretch! 'tis pity that thou livest
To walk where any honest man resort.
ANTIPHOLUS
Thou art a villain to impeach me thus:
I'll prove mine honour and mine honesty
Against thee presently, if thou darest stand.
I dare, and do defy thee for a villain.
They draw
Enter ADRIANA, LUCIANA, the Courtezan, and others
Hold, hurt him not, for God's sake! he is mad.
Some get within him, take his sword away:
Bind Dromio too, and bear them to my house.
Run, master, run
This is some priory. In, or we are spoil'd!
Exeunt Antipholus of Syracuse and Dromio of Syracuse to the Priory
Enter the Lady Abbess, AEMILIA
Be quiet, people. Wherefore throng you hither?
To fetch my poor distracted husband hence.
Let us come in, that we may bind him fast
And bear him home for his recovery.
I knew he was not in his perfect wits.
I am sorry now that I did draw on him.
How long hath this possession held the man?
This week he hath been heavy, sour, sad,
And much different from the man he was
But till this afternoon his passion
Ne'er brake into extremity of rage.
Hath he not lost much wealth by wreck of sea?
Buried some dear friend? Hath not else his eye
Stray'd his affection in unlawful love?
A sin prevailing much in youthful men,
Who give their eyes the liberty of gazing.
Which of these sorrows is he subject to?
To none of these, except it be the last
Namely, some love that drew him oft from home.
You should for that have reprehended him.
Why, so I did.
Ay, but not rough enough.
As roughly as my modesty would let me.
Haply, in private.
And in assemblies too.
Ay, but not enough.
It was the copy of our conference:
In bed he slept not for my urging it
At board he fed not for my urging it
Alone, it was the subject of my theme
In company I often glanced it
Still did I tell him it was vile and bad.
And thereof came it that the man was mad.
The venom clamours of a jealous woman
Poisons more deadly than a mad dog's tooth.
It seems his sleeps were hinder'd by thy railing,
And therefore comes it that his head is light.
Thou say'st his meat was sauced with thy upbraidings:
Unquiet meals make ill digestions
Thereof the raging fire of fever bred
And what's a fever but a fit of madness?
Thou say'st his sports were hinderd by thy brawls:
Sweet recreation barr'd, what doth ensue
But moody and dull melancholy,
Kinsman to grim and comfortless despair,
And at her heels a huge infectious troop
Of pale distemperatures and foes to life?
In food, in sport and life-preserving rest
To be disturb'd, would mad or man or beast:
The consequence is then thy jealous fits
Have scared thy husband from the use of wits.
She never reprehended him but mildly,
When he demean'd himself rough, rude and wildly.
Why bear you these rebukes and answer not?
She did betray me to my own reproof.
Good people enter and lay hold on him.
No, not a creature enters in my house.
Then let your servants bring my husband forth.
Neither: he took this place for sanctuary,
And it shall privilege him from your hands
Till I have brought him to his wits again,
Or lose my labour in assaying it.
I will attend my husband, be his nurse,
Diet his sickness, for it is my office,
And will have no attorney but myself
And therefore let me have him home with me.
Be patient
Till I have used the approved means I have,
With wholesome syrups, drugs and holy prayers,
To make of him a formal man again:
It is a branch and parcel of mine oath,
A charitable duty of my order.
Therefore depart and leave him here with me.
I will not hence and leave my husband here:
And ill it doth beseem your holiness
To separate the husband and the wife.
Be quiet and depart: thou shalt not have him.
Exit
Complain unto the duke of this indignity.
Come, go: I will fall prostrate at his feet
And never rise until my tears and prayers
Have won his grace to come in person hither
And take perforce my husband from the abbess.
By this, I think, the dial points at five:
Anon, I'm sure, the duke himself in person
Comes this way to the melancholy vale,
The place of death and sorry execution,
Behind the ditches of the abbey here.
Upon what cause?
To see a reverend Syracusian merchant,
Who put unluckily into this bay
Against the laws and statutes of this town,
Beheaded publicly for his offence.
See where they come: we will behold his death.
Kneel to the duke before he pass the abbey.
Enter DUKE SOLINUS, attended
Yet once again proclaim it publicly,
If any friend will pay the sum for him,
He shall not die
Justice, most sacred duke, against the abbess!
She is a virtuous and a reverend lady:
It cannot be that she hath done thee wrong.
May it please your grace, Antipholus, my husband,
Whom I made lord of me and all I had,
At your important letters,--this ill day
A most outrageous fit of madness took him
That desperately he hurried through the street,
With him his bondman, all as mad as he--
Doing displeasure to the citizens
By rushing in their houses, bearing thence
Rings, jewels, any thing his rage did like.
Once did I get him bound and sent him home,
Whilst to take order for the wrongs I went,
That here and there his fury had committed.
Anon, I wot not by what strong escape,
He broke from those that had the guard of him
And with his mad attendant and himself,
Each one with ireful passion, with drawn swords,
Met us again and madly bent on us,
Chased us away
We came again to bind them. Then they fled
Into this abbey, whither we pursued them:
And here the abbess shuts the gates on us
And will not suffer us to fetch him out,
Nor send him forth that we may bear him hence.
Therefore, most gracious duke, with thy command
Let him be brought forth and borne hence for help.
Long since thy husband served me in my wars,
And I to thee engaged a prince's word,
When thou didst make him master of thy bed,
To do him all the grace and good I could.
Go, some of you, knock at the abbey-gate
And bid the lady abbess come to me.
I will determine this before I stir.
Enter a Servant
O mistress, mistress, shift and save yourself!
My master and his man are both broke loose,
Beaten the maids a-row and bound the doctor
Whose beard they have singed off with brands of fire
And ever, as it blazed, they threw on him
Great pails of puddled mire to quench the hair:
My master preaches patience to him and the while
His man with scissors nicks him like a fool,
And sure, unless you send some present help,
Between them they will kill the conjurer.
Peace, fool! thy master and his man are here,
And that is false thou dost report to us.
Mistress, upon my life, I tell you true
I have not breathed almost since I did see it.
He cries for you, and vows, if he can take you,
To scorch your face and to disfigure you.
Cry within
Hark, hark! I hear him, mistress. fly, be gone!
Come, stand by me
Ay me, it is my husband! Witness you,
That he is borne about invisible:
Even now we housed him in the abbey here
And now he's there, past thought of human reason.
Enter ANTIPHOLUS of Ephesus and DROMIO of Ephesus
ANTIPHOLUS
Justice, most gracious duke, O, grant me justice!
Even for the service that long since I did thee,
When I bestrid thee in the wars and took
Deep scars to save thy life
That then I lost for thee, now grant me justice.
Unless the fear of death doth make me dote,
I see my son Antipholus and Dromio.
ANTIPHOLUS
Justice, sweet prince, against that woman there!
She whom thou gavest to me to be my wife,
That hath abused and dishonour'd me
Even in the strength and height of injury!
Beyond imagination is the wrong
That she this day hath shameless thrown on me.
Discover how, and thou shalt find me just.
ANTIPHOLUS
This day, great duke, she shut the doors upon me,
While she with harlots feasted in my house.
A grievous fault! Say, woman, didst thou so?
No, my good lord: myself, he and my sister
To-day did dine together. So befall my soul
As this is false he burdens me withal!
Ne'er may I look on day, nor sleep on night,
But she tells to your highness simple truth!
O perjured woman! They are both forsworn:
In this the madman justly chargeth them.
ANTIPHOLUS
My liege, I am advised what I say,
Neither disturbed with the effect of wine,
Nor heady-rash, provoked with raging ire,
Albeit my wrongs might make one wiser mad.
This woman lock'd me out this day from dinner:
That goldsmith there, were he not pack'd with her,
Could witness it, for he was with me then
Who parted with me to go fetch a chain,
Promising to bring it to the Porpentine,
Where Balthazar and I did dine together.
Our dinner done, and he not coming thither,
I went to seek him: in the street I met him
And in his company that gentleman.
There did this perjured goldsmith swear me down
That I this day of him received the chain,
Which, God he knows, I saw not: for the which
He did arrest me with an officer.
I did obey, and sent my peasant home
For certain ducats: he with none return'd
Then fairly I bespoke the officer
To go in person with me to my house.
By the way we met
My wife, her sister, and a rabble more
Of vile confederates. Along with them
They brought one Pinch, a hungry lean-faced villain,
A mere anatomy, a mountebank,
A threadbare juggler and a fortune-teller,
A needy, hollow-eyed, sharp-looking wretch,
A dead-looking man: this pernicious slave,
Forsooth, took on him as a conjurer,
And, gazing in mine eyes, feeling my pulse,
And with no face, as 'twere, outfacing me,
Cries out, I was possess'd. Then all together
They fell upon me, bound me, bore me thence
And in a dark and dankish vault at home
There left me and my man, both bound together
Till, gnawing with my teeth my bonds in sunder,
I gain'd my freedom, and immediately
Ran hither to your grace
To give me ample satisfaction
For these deep shames and great indignities.
My lord, in truth, thus far I witness with him,
That he dined not at home, but was lock'd out.
But had he such a chain of thee or no?
He had, my lord: and when he ran in here,
These people saw the chain about his neck.
Besides, I will be sworn these ears of mine
Heard you confess you had the chain of him
After you first forswore it on the mart:
And thereupon I drew my sword on you
And then you fled into this abbey here,
From whence, I think, you are come by miracle.
ANTIPHOLUS
I never came within these abbey-walls,
Nor ever didst thou draw thy sword on me:
I never saw the chain, so help me Heaven!
And this is false you burden me withal.
Why, what an intricate impeach is this!
I think you all have drunk of Circe's cup.
If here you housed him, here he would have been
If he were mad, he would not plead so coldly:
You say he dined at home
Denies that saying. Sirrah, what say you?
Sir, he dined with her there, at the Porpentine.
He did, and from my finger snatch'd that ring.
ANTIPHOLUS
'Tis true, my liege
Saw'st thou him enter at the abbey here?
As sure, my liege, as I do see your grace.
Why, this is strange. Go call the abbess hither.
I think you are all mated or stark mad.
Exit one to Abbess
Most mighty duke, vouchsafe me speak a word:
Haply I see a friend will save my life
And pay the sum that may deliver me.
Speak freely, Syracusian, what thou wilt.
Is not your name, sir, call'd Antipholus?
And is not that your bondman, Dromio?
Within this hour I was his bondman sir,
But he, I thank him, gnaw'd in two my cords:
Now am I Dromio and his man unbound.
I am sure you both of you remember me.
Ourselves we do remember, sir, by you
For lately we were bound, as you are now
You are not Pinch's patient, are you, sir?
Why look you strange on me? you know me well.
I never saw you in my life till now.
O, grief hath changed me since you saw me last,
And careful hours with time's deformed hand
Have written strange defeatures in my face:
But tell me yet, dost thou not know my voice?
ANTIPHOLUS
Neither.
Dromio, nor thou?
No, trust me, sir, nor I.
I am sure thou dost.
Ay, sir, but I am sure I do not
man denies, you are now bound to believe him.
Not know my voice! O time's extremity,
Hast thou so crack'd and splitted my poor tongue
In seven short years, that here my only son
Knows not my feeble key of untuned cares?
Though now this grained face of mine be hid
In sap-consuming winter's drizzled snow,
And all the conduits of my blood froze up,
Yet hath my night of life some memory,
My wasting lamps some fading glimmer left,
My dull deaf ears a little use to hear:
All these old witnesses--I cannot err--
Tell me thou art my son Antipholus.
ANTIPHOLUS
I never saw my father in my life.
But seven years since, in Syracusa, boy,
Thou know'st we parted: but perhaps, my son,
Thou shamest to acknowledge me in misery.
ANTIPHOLUS
The duke and all that know me in the city
Can witness with me that it is not so
I ne'er saw Syracusa in my life.
I tell thee, Syracusian, twenty years
Have I been patron to Antipholus,
During which time he ne'er saw Syracusa:
I see thy age and dangers make thee dote.
Re-enter AEMILIA, with ANTIPHOLUS of Syracuse and DROMIO of Syracuse
Most mighty duke, behold a man much wrong'd.
All gather to see them
I see two husbands, or mine eyes deceive me.
One of these men is Genius to the other
And so of these. Which is the natural man,
And which the spirit? who deciphers them?
I, sir, am Dromio
I, sir, am Dromio
ANTIPHOLUS
AEgeon art thou not? or else his ghost?
O, my old master! who hath bound him here?
Whoever bound him, I will loose his bonds
And gain a husband by his liberty.
Speak, old AEgeon, if thou be'st the man
That hadst a wife once call'd AEmilia
That bore thee at a burden two fair sons:
O, if thou be'st the same AEgeon, speak,
And speak unto the same AEmilia!
If I dream not, thou art AEmilia:
If thou art she, tell me where is that son
That floated with thee on the fatal raft?
By men of Epidamnum he and I
And the twin Dromio all were taken up
But by and by rude fishermen of Corinth
By force took Dromio and my son from them
And me they left with those of Epidamnum.
What then became of them I cannot tell
I to this fortune that you see me in.
Why, here begins his morning story right
These two Antipholuses, these two so like,
And these two Dromios, one in semblance,--
Besides her urging of her wreck at sea,--
These are the parents to these children,
Which accidentally are met together.
Antipholus, thou camest from Corinth first?
ANTIPHOLUS
No, sir, not I
Stay, stand apart
ANTIPHOLUS
I came from Corinth, my most gracious lord,--
And I with him.
ANTIPHOLUS
Brought to this town by that most famous warrior,
Duke Menaphon, your most renowned uncle.
Which of you two did dine with me to-day?
ANTIPHOLUS
I, gentle mistress.
And are not you my husband?
ANTIPHOLUS
No
ANTIPHOLUS
And so do I
And this fair gentlewoman, her sister here,
Did call me brother.
To Luciana
What I told you then,
I hope I shall have leisure to make good
If this be not a dream I see and hear.
That is the chain, sir, which you had of me.
ANTIPHOLUS
I think it be, sir
ANTIPHOLUS
And you, sir, for this chain arrested me.
I think I did, sir
I sent you money, sir, to be your bail,
By Dromio
No, none by me.
ANTIPHOLUS
This purse of ducats I received from you,
And Dromio, my man, did bring them me.
I see we still did meet each other's man,
And I was ta'en for him, and he for me,
And thereupon these errors are arose.
ANTIPHOLUS
These ducats pawn I for my father here.
It shall not need
Sir, I must have that diamond from you.
ANTIPHOLUS
There, take it
Renowned duke, vouchsafe to take the pains
To go with us into the abbey here
And hear at large discoursed all our fortunes:
And all that are assembled in this place,
That by this sympathized one day's error
Have suffer'd wrong, go keep us company,
And we shall make full satisfaction.
Thirty-three years have I but gone in travail
Of you, my sons
My heavy burden ne'er delivered.
The duke, my husband and my children both,
And you the calendars of their nativity,
Go to a gossips' feast and go with me
After so long grief, such festivity!
With all my heart, I'll gossip at this feast.
Exeunt all but Antipholus of Syracuse, Antipholus of Ephesus, Dromio of Syracuse and Dromio of Ephesus
Master, shall I fetch your stuff from shipboard?
ANTIPHOLUS
Dromio, what stuff of mine hast thou embark'd?
Your goods that lay at host, sir, in the Centaur.
ANTIPHOLUS
He speaks to me. I am your master, Dromio:
Come, go with us
Embrace thy brother there
Exeunt Antipholus of Syracuse and Antipholus of Ephesus
There is a fat friend at your master's house,
That kitchen'd me for you to-day at dinner:
She now shall be my sister, not my wife.
Methinks you are my glass, and not my brother:
I see by you I am a sweet-faced youth.
Will you walk in to see their gossiping?
Not I, sir
That's a question: how shall we try it?
We'll draw cuts for the senior: till then lead thou first.
Nay, then, thus:
We came into the world like brother and brother
And now let's go hand in hand, not one before another.
Exeunt
ACT I
SCENE I. Rome. A street.
Enter a company of mutinous Citizens, with staves, clubs, and other weapons
Before we proceed any further, hear me speak.
Speak, speak.
You are all resolved rather to die than to famish?
Resolved. resolved.
First, you know Caius Marcius is chief enemy to the people.
We know't, we know't.
Let us kill him, and we'll have corn at our own price.
Is't a verdict?
No more talking on't
One word, good citizens.
We are accounted poor citizens, the patricians good.
What authority surfeits on would relieve us: if they
would yield us but the superfluity, while it were
wholesome, we might guess they relieved us humanely
but they think we are too dear: the leanness that
afflicts us, the object of our misery, is as an
inventory to particularise their abundance
sufferance is a gain to them Let us revenge this with
our pikes, ere we become rakes: for the gods know I
speak this in hunger for bread, not in thirst for revenge.
Would you proceed especially against Caius Marcius?
Against him first: he's a very dog to the commonalty.
Consider you what services he has done for his country?
Very well
report fort, but that he pays himself with being proud.
Nay, but speak not maliciously.
I say unto you, what he hath done famously, he did
it to that end: though soft-conscienced men can be
content to say it was for his country he did it to
please his mother and to be partly proud
is, even till the altitude of his virtue.
What he cannot help in his nature, you account a
vice in him. You must in no way say he is covetous.
If I must not, I need not be barren of accusations
he hath faults, with surplus, to tire in repetition.
Shouts within
What shouts are these? The other side o' the city
is risen: why stay we prating here? to the Capitol!
Come, come.
Soft! who comes here?
Enter MENENIUS AGRIPPA
Worthy Menenius Agrippa
the people.
He's one honest enough: would all the rest were so!
What work's, my countrymen, in hand? where go you
With bats and clubs? The matter? speak, I pray you.
Our business is not unknown to the senate
had inkling this fortnight what we intend to do,
which now we'll show 'em in deeds. They say poor
suitors have strong breaths: they shall know we
have strong arms too.
Why, masters, my good friends, mine honest neighbours,
Will you undo yourselves?
We cannot, sir, we are undone already.
I tell you, friends, most charitable care
Have the patricians of you. For your wants,
Your suffering in this dearth, you may as well
Strike at the heaven with your staves as lift them
Against the Roman state, whose course will on
The way it takes, cracking ten thousand curbs
Of more strong link asunder than can ever
Appear in your impediment. For the dearth,
The gods, not the patricians, make it, and
Your knees to them, not arms, must help. Alack,
You are transported by calamity
Thither where more attends you, and you slander
The helms o' the state, who care for you like fathers,
When you curse them as enemies.
Care for us! True, indeed! They ne'er cared for us
yet: suffer us to famish, and their store-houses
crammed with grain
support usurers
established against the rich, and provide more
piercing statutes daily, to chain up and restrain
the poor. If the wars eat us not up, they will
there's all the love they bear us.
Either you must
Confess yourselves wondrous malicious,
Or be accused of folly. I shall tell you
A pretty tale: it may be you have heard it
But, since it serves my purpose, I will venture
To stale 't a little more.
Well, I'll hear it, sir: yet you must not think to
fob off our disgrace with a tale: but, an 't please
you, deliver.
There was a time when all the body's members
Rebell'd against the belly, thus accused it:
That only like a gulf it did remain
I' the midst o' the body, idle and unactive,
Still cupboarding the viand, never bearing
Like labour with the rest, where the other instruments
Did see and hear, devise, instruct, walk, feel,
And, mutually participate, did minister
Unto the appetite and affection common
Of the whole body. The belly answer'd--
Well, sir, what answer made the belly?
Sir, I shall tell you. With a kind of smile,
Which ne'er came from the lungs, but even thus--
For, look you, I may make the belly smile
As well as speak--it tauntingly replied
To the discontented members, the mutinous parts
That envied his receipt
As you malign our senators for that
They are not such as you.
Your belly's answer? What!
The kingly-crowned head, the vigilant eye,
The counsellor heart, the arm our soldier,
Our steed the leg, the tongue our trumpeter.
With other muniments and petty helps
In this our fabric, if that they--
What then?
'Fore me, this fellow speaks! What then? what then?
Should by the cormorant belly be restrain'd,
Who is the sink o' the body,--
Well, what then?
The former agents, if they did complain,
What could the belly answer?
I will tell you
If you'll bestow a small--of what you have little--
Patience awhile, you'll hear the belly's answer.
Ye're long about it.
Note me this, good friend
Your most grave belly was deliberate,
Not rash like his accusers, and thus answer'd:
'True is it, my incorporate friends,' quoth he,
'That I receive the general food at first,
Which you do live upon
Because I am the store-house and the shop
Of the whole body: but, if you do remember,
I send it through the rivers of your blood,
Even to the court, the heart, to the seat o' the brain
And, through the cranks and offices of man,
The strongest nerves and small inferior veins
From me receive that natural competency
Whereby they live: and though that all at once,
You, my good friends,'--this says the belly, mark me,--
Ay, sir
'Though all at once cannot
See what I do deliver out to each,
Yet I can make my audit up, that all
From me do back receive the flour of all,
And leave me but the bran.' What say you to't?
It was an answer: how apply you this?
The senators of Rome are this good belly,
And you the mutinous members
Their counsels and their cares, digest things rightly
Touching the weal o' the common, you shall find
No public benefit which you receive
But it proceeds or comes from them to you
And no way from yourselves. What do you think,
You, the great toe of this assembly?
I the great toe! why the great toe?
For that, being one o' the lowest, basest, poorest,
Of this most wise rebellion, thou go'st foremost:
Thou rascal, that art worst in blood to run,
Lead'st first to win some vantage.
But make you ready your stiff bats and clubs:
Rome and her rats are at the point of battle
The one side must have bale.
Enter CAIUS MARCIUS
Hail, noble Marcius!
Thanks. What's the matter, you dissentious rogues,
That, rubbing the poor itch of your opinion,
Make yourselves scabs?
We have ever your good word.
He that will give good words to thee will flatter
Beneath abhorring. What would you have, you curs,
That like nor peace nor war? the one affrights you,
The other makes you proud. He that trusts to you,
Where he should find you lions, finds you hares
Where foxes, geese: you are no surer, no,
Than is the coal of fire upon the ice,
Or hailstone in the sun. Your virtue is
To make him worthy whose offence subdues him
And curse that justice did it.
Who deserves greatness
Deserves your hate
A sick man's appetite, who desires most that
Which would increase his evil. He that depends
Upon your favours swims with fins of lead
And hews down oaks with rushes. Hang ye! Trust Ye?
With every minute you do change a mind,
And call him noble that was now your hate,
Him vile that was your garland. What's the matter,
That in these several places of the city
You cry against the noble senate, who,
Under the gods, keep you in awe, which else
Would feed on one another? What's their seeking?
For corn at their own rates
The city is well stored.
Hang 'em! They say!
They'll sit by the fire, and presume to know
What's done i' the Capitol
Who thrives and who declines
and give out
Conjectural marriages
And feebling such as stand not in their liking
Below their cobbled shoes. They say there's
grain enough!
Would the nobility lay aside their ruth,
And let me use my sword, I'll make a quarry
With thousands of these quarter'd slaves, as high
As I could pick my lance.
Nay, these are almost thoroughly persuaded
For though abundantly they lack discretion,
Yet are they passing cowardly. But, I beseech you,
What says the other troop?
They are dissolved: hang 'em!
They said they were an-hungry
That hunger broke stone walls, that dogs must eat,
That meat was made for mouths, that the gods sent not
Corn for the rich men only: with these shreds
They vented their complainings
And a petition granted them, a strange one--
To break the heart of generosity,
And make bold power look pale--they threw their caps
As they would hang them on the horns o' the moon,
Shouting their emulation.
What is granted them?
Five tribunes to defend their vulgar wisdoms,
Of their own choice: one's Junius Brutus,
Sicinius Velutus, and I know not--'Sdeath!
The rabble should have first unroof'd the city,
Ere so prevail'd with me: it will in time
Win upon power and throw forth greater themes
For insurrection's arguing.
This is strange.
Go, get you home, you fragments!
Enter a Messenger, hastily
Where's Caius Marcius?
Here: what's the matter?
The news is, sir, the Volsces are in arms.
I am glad on 't: then we shall ha' means to vent
Our musty superfluity. See, our best elders.
Enter COMINIUS, TITUS LARTIUS, and other Senators
Marcius, 'tis true that you have lately told us
The Volsces are in arms.
They have a leader,
Tullus Aufidius, that will put you to 't.
I sin in envying his nobility,
And were I any thing but what I am,
I would wish me only he.
You have fought together.
Were half to half the world by the ears and he.
Upon my party, I'ld revolt to make
Only my wars with him: he is a lion
That I am proud to hunt.
Then, worthy Marcius,
Attend upon Cominius to these wars.
It is your former promise.
Sir, it is
And I am constant. Titus Lartius, thou
Shalt see me once more strike at Tullus' face.
What, art thou stiff? stand'st out?
No, Caius Marcius
I'll lean upon one crutch and fight with t'other,
Ere stay behind this business.
O, true-bred!
Your company to the Capitol
Our greatest friends attend us.
[To COMINIUS]                Lead you on.
To MARCIUS
Right worthy you priority.
Noble Marcius!
[To the Citizens]  Hence to your homes
Nay, let them follow:
The Volsces have much corn
To gnaw their garners. Worshipful mutiners,
Your valour puts well forth: pray, follow.
Citizens steal away. Exeunt all but SICINIUS and BRUTUS
Was ever man so proud as is this Marcius?
He has no equal.
When we were chosen tribunes for the people,--
Mark'd you his lip and eyes?
Nay. but his taunts.
Being moved, he will not spare to gird the gods.
Be-mock the modest moon.
The present wars devour him: he is grown
Too proud to be so valiant.
Such a nature,
Tickled with good success, disdains the shadow
Which he treads on at noon: but I do wonder
His insolence can brook to be commanded
Under Cominius.
Fame, at the which he aims,
In whom already he's well graced, can not
Better be held nor more attain'd than by
A place below the first: for what miscarries
Shall be the general's fault, though he perform
To the utmost of a man, and giddy censure
Will then cry out of Marcius 'O if he
Had borne the business!'
Besides, if things go well,
Opinion that so sticks on Marcius shall
Of his demerits rob Cominius.
Come:
Half all Cominius' honours are to Marcius.
Though Marcius earned them not, and all his faults
To Marcius shall be honours, though indeed
In aught he merit not.
Let's hence, and hear
How the dispatch is made, and in what fashion,
More than his singularity, he goes
Upon this present action.
Lets along.
Exeunt
SCENE II. Corioli. The Senate-house.
Enter TULLUS AUFIDIUS and certain Senators
So, your opinion is, Aufidius,
That they of Rome are entered in our counsels
And know how we proceed.
Is it not yours?
What ever have been thought on in this state,
That could be brought to bodily act ere Rome
Had circumvention? 'Tis not four days gone
Since I heard thence
I have the letter here
Reads
'They have press'd a power, but it is not known
Whether for east or west: the dearth is great
The people mutinous
Cominius, Marcius your old enemy,
Who is of Rome worse hated than of you,
And Titus Lartius, a most valiant Roman,
These three lead on this preparation
Whither 'tis bent: most likely 'tis for you:
Consider of it.'
Our army's in the field
We never yet made doubt but Rome was ready
To answer us.
Nor did you think it folly
To keep your great pretences veil'd till when
They needs must show themselves
in the hatching,
It seem'd, appear'd to Rome. By the discovery.
We shall be shorten'd in our aim, which was
To take in many towns ere almost Rome
Should know we were afoot.
Noble Aufidius,
Take your commission
Let us alone to guard Corioli:
If they set down before 's, for the remove
Bring your army
They've not prepared for us.
O, doubt not that
I speak from certainties. Nay, more,
Some parcels of their power are forth already,
And only hitherward. I leave your honours.
If we and Caius Marcius chance to meet,
'Tis sworn between us we shall ever strike
Till one can do no more.
The gods assist you!
And keep your honours safe!
Farewell.
Farewell.
Farewell.
Exeunt
SCENE III. Rome. A room in Marcius' house.
Enter VOLUMNIA and VIRGILIA	they set them down on two low stools, and sew
I pray you, daughter, sing
more comfortable sort: if my son were my husband, I
should freelier rejoice in that absence wherein he
won honour than in the embracements of his bed where
he would show most love. When yet he was but
tender-bodied and the only son of my womb, when
youth with comeliness plucked all gaze his way, when
for a day of kings' entreaties a mother should not
sell him an hour from her beholding, I, considering
how honour would become such a person. that it was
no better than picture-like to hang by the wall, if
renown made it not stir, was pleased to let him seek
danger where he was like to find fame. To a cruel
war I sent him
bound with oak. I tell thee, daughter, I sprang not
more in joy at first hearing he was a man-child
than now in first seeing he had proved himself a
man.
But had he died in the business, madam
Then his good report should have been my son
therein would have found issue. Hear me profess
sincerely: had I a dozen sons, each in my love
alike and none less dear than thine and my good
Marcius, I had rather had eleven die nobly for their
country than one voluptuously surfeit out of action.
Enter a Gentlewoman
Madam, the Lady Valeria is come to visit you.
Beseech you, give me leave to retire myself.
Indeed, you shall not.
Methinks I hear hither your husband's drum,
See him pluck Aufidius down by the hair,
As children from a bear, the Volsces shunning him:
Methinks I see him stamp thus, and call thus:
'Come on, you cowards! you were got in fear,
Though you were born in Rome:' his bloody brow
With his mail'd hand then wiping, forth he goes,
Like to a harvest-man that's task'd to mow
Or all or lose his hire.
His bloody brow! O Jupiter, no blood!
Away, you fool! it more becomes a man
Than gilt his trophy: the breasts of Hecuba,
When she did suckle Hector, look'd not lovelier
Than Hector's forehead when it spit forth blood
At Grecian sword, contemning. Tell Valeria,
We are fit to bid her welcome.
Exit Gentlewoman
Heavens bless my lord from fell Aufidius!
He'll beat Aufidius 'head below his knee
And tread upon his neck.
Enter VALERIA, with an Usher and Gentlewoman
My ladies both, good day to you.
Sweet madam.
I am glad to see your ladyship.
How do you both? you are manifest house-keepers.
What are you sewing here? A fine spot, in good
faith. How does your little son?
I thank your ladyship
He had rather see the swords, and hear a drum, than
look upon his school-master.
O' my word, the father's son: I'll swear,'tis a
very pretty boy. O' my troth, I looked upon him o'
Wednesday half an hour together: has such a
confirmed countenance. I saw him run after a gilded
butterfly: and when he caught it, he let it go
again
comes, and again
fall enraged him, or how 'twas, he did so set his
teeth and tear it
it!
One on 's father's moods.
Indeed, la, 'tis a noble child.
A crack, madam.
Come, lay aside your stitchery
the idle husewife with me this afternoon.
No, good madam
Not out of doors!
She shall, she shall.
Indeed, no, by your patience
threshold till my lord return from the wars.
Fie, you confine yourself most unreasonably: come,
you must go visit the good lady that lies in.
I will wish her speedy strength, and visit her with
my prayers
Why, I pray you?
'Tis not to save labour, nor that I want love.
You would be another Penelope: yet, they say, all
the yarn she spun in Ulysses' absence did but fill
Ithaca full of moths. Come
were sensible as your finger, that you might leave
pricking it for pity. Come, you shall go with us.
No, good madam, pardon me
In truth, la, go with me
excellent news of your husband.
O, good madam, there can be none yet.
Verily, I do not jest with you
him last night.
Indeed, madam?
In earnest, it's true
Thus it is: the Volsces have an army forth
whom Cominius the general is gone, with one part of
our Roman power: your lord and Titus Lartius are set
down before their city Corioli
prevailing and to make it brief wars. This is true,
on mine honour
Give me excuse, good madam
thing hereafter.
Let her alone, lady: as she is now, she will but
disease our better mirth.
In troth, I think she would. Fare you well, then.
Come, good sweet lady. Prithee, Virgilia, turn thy
solemness out o' door. and go along with us.
No, at a word, madam
you much mirth.
Well, then, farewell.
Exeunt
SCENE IV. Before Corioli.
Enter, with drum and colours, MARCIUS, TITUS  LARTIUS, Captains and Soldiers. To them a Messenger
Yonder comes news. A wager they have met.
My horse to yours, no.
'Tis done.
Agreed.
Say, has our general met the enemy?
They lie in view
So, the good horse is mine.
I'll buy him of you.
No, I'll nor sell nor give him: lend you him I will
For half a hundred years. Summon the town.
How far off lie these armies?
Within this mile and half.
Then shall we hear their 'larum, and they ours.
Now, Mars, I prithee, make us quick in work,
That we with smoking swords may march from hence,
To help our fielded friends! Come, blow thy blast.
They sound a parley. Enter two Senators with others on the walls
Tutus Aufidius, is he within your walls?
No, nor a man that fears you less than he,
That's lesser than a little.
Drums afar off
Hark! our drums
Are bringing forth our youth. We'll break our walls,
Rather than they shall pound us up: our gates,
Which yet seem shut, we, have but pinn'd with rushes
They'll open of themselves.
Alarum afar off
Hark you. far off!
There is Aufidius
Amongst your cloven army.
O, they are at it!
Their noise be our instruction. Ladders, ho!
Enter the army of the Volsces
They fear us not, but issue forth their city.
Now put your shields before your hearts, and fight
With hearts more proof than shields. Advance,
brave Titus:
They do disdain us much beyond our thoughts,
Which makes me sweat with wrath. Come on, my fellows:
He that retires I'll take him for a Volsce,
And he shall feel mine edge.
Alarum. The Romans are beat back to their trenches. Re-enter MARCIUS cursing
All the contagion of the south light on you,
You shames of Rome! you herd of--Boils and plagues
Plaster you o'er, that you may be abhorr'd
Further than seen and one infect another
Against the wind a mile! You souls of geese,
That bear the shapes of men, how have you run
From slaves that apes would beat! Pluto and hell!
All hurt behind
With flight and agued fear! Mend and charge home,
Or, by the fires of heaven, I'll leave the foe
And make my wars on you: look to't: come on
If you'll stand fast, we'll beat them to their wives,
As they us to our trenches followed.
Another alarum. The Volsces fly, and MARCIUS follows them to the gates
So, now the gates are ope: now prove good seconds:
'Tis for the followers fortune widens them,
Not for the fliers: mark me, and do the like.
Enters the gates
Fool-hardiness
Nor I.
MARCIUS is shut in
See, they have shut him in.
To the pot, I warrant him.
Alarum continues
Re-enter TITUS LARTIUS
What is become of Marcius?
Slain, sir, doubtless.
Following the fliers at the very heels,
With them he enters
Clapp'd to their gates: he is himself alone,
To answer all the city.
O noble fellow!
Who sensibly outdares his senseless sword,
And, when it bows, stands up. Thou art left, Marcius:
A carbuncle entire, as big as thou art,
Were not so rich a jewel. Thou wast a soldier
Even to Cato's wish, not fierce and terrible
Only in strokes
The thunder-like percussion of thy sounds,
Thou madst thine enemies shake, as if the world
Were feverous and did tremble.
Re-enter MARCIUS, bleeding, assaulted by the enemy
Look, sir.
O,'tis Marcius!
Let's fetch him off, or make remain alike.
They fight, and all enter the city
SCENE V. Corioli. A street.
Enter certain Romans, with spoils
This will I carry to Rome.
And I this.
A murrain on't! I took this for silver.
Alarum continues still afar off
Enter MARCIUS and TITUS LARTIUS with a trumpet
See here these movers that do prize their hours
At a crack'd drachm! Cushions, leaden spoons,
Irons of a doit, doublets that hangmen would
Bury with those that wore them, these base slaves,
Ere yet the fight be done, pack up: down with them!
And hark, what noise the general makes! To him!
There is the man of my soul's hate, Aufidius,
Piercing our Romans: then, valiant Titus, take
Convenient numbers to make good the city
Whilst I, with those that have the spirit, will haste
To help Cominius.
Worthy sir, thou bleed'st
Thy exercise hath been too violent for
A second course of fight.
Sir, praise me not
My work hath yet not warm'd me: fare you well:
The blood I drop is rather physical
Than dangerous to me: to Aufidius thus
I will appear, and fight.
Now the fair goddess, Fortune,
Fall deep in love with thee
Misguide thy opposers' swords! Bold gentleman,
Prosperity be thy page!
Thy friend no less
Than those she placeth highest! So, farewell.
Thou worthiest Marcius!
Exit MARCIUS
Go, sound thy trumpet in the market-place
Call thither all the officers o' the town,
Where they shall know our mind: away!
Exeunt
SCENE VI. Near the camp of Cominius.
Enter COMINIUS, as it were in retire, with soldiers
Breathe you, my friends: well fought
we are come off
Like Romans, neither foolish in our stands,
Nor cowardly in retire: believe me, sirs,
We shall be charged again. Whiles we have struck,
By interims and conveying gusts we have heard
The charges of our friends. Ye Roman gods!
Lead their successes as we wish our own,
That both our powers, with smiling
fronts encountering,
May give you thankful sacrifice.
Enter a Messenger
Thy news?
The citizens of Corioli have issued,
And given to Lartius and to Marcius battle:
I saw our party to their trenches driven,
And then I came away.
Though thou speak'st truth,
Methinks thou speak'st not well.
How long is't since?
Above an hour, my lord.
'Tis not a mile
How couldst thou in a mile confound an hour,
And bring thy news so late?
Spies of the Volsces
Held me in chase, that I was forced to wheel
Three or four miles about, else had I, sir,
Half an hour since brought my report.
Who's yonder,
That does appear as he were flay'd? O gods
He has the stamp of Marcius
Before-time seen him thus.
[Within]                 Come I too late?
The shepherd knows not thunder from a tabour
More than I know the sound of Marcius' tongue
From every meaner man.
Enter MARCIUS
Come I too late?
Ay, if you come not in the blood of others,
But mantled in your own.
O, let me clip ye
In arms as sound as when I woo'd, in heart
As merry as when our nuptial day was done,
And tapers burn'd to bedward!
Flower of warriors,
How is it with Titus Lartius?
As with a man busied about decrees:
Condemning some to death, and some to exile
Ransoming him, or pitying, threatening the other
Holding Corioli in the name of Rome,
Even like a fawning greyhound in the leash,
To let him slip at will.
Where is that slave
Which told me they had beat you to your trenches?
Where is he? call him hither.
Let him alone
He did inform the truth: but for our gentlemen,
The common file--a plague! tribunes for them!--
The mouse ne'er shunn'd the cat as they did budge
From rascals worse than they.
But how prevail'd you?
Will the time serve to tell? I do not think.
Where is the enemy? are you lords o' the field?
If not, why cease you till you are so?
Marcius,
We have at disadvantage fought and did
Retire to win our purpose.
How lies their battle? know you on which side
They have placed their men of trust?
As I guess, Marcius,
Their bands i' the vaward are the Antiates,
Of their best trust
Their very heart of hope.
I do beseech you,
By all the battles wherein we have fought,
By the blood we have shed together, by the vows
We have made to endure friends, that you directly
Set me against Aufidius and his Antiates
And that you not delay the present, but,
Filling the air with swords advanced and darts,
We prove this very hour.
Though I could wish
You were conducted to a gentle bath
And balms applied to, you, yet dare I never
Deny your asking: take your choice of those
That best can aid your action.
Those are they
That most are willing. If any such be here--
As it were sin to doubt--that love this painting
Wherein you see me smear'd
Lesser his person than an ill report
If any think brave death outweighs bad life
And that his country's dearer than himself
Let him alone, or so many so minded,
Wave thus, to express his disposition,
And follow Marcius.
They all shout and wave their swords, take him up in their arms, and cast up their caps
O, me alone! make you a sword of me?
If these shows be not outward, which of you
But is four Volsces? none of you but is
Able to bear against the great Aufidius
A shield as hard as his. A certain number,
Though thanks to all, must I select
from all: the rest
Shall bear the business in some other fight,
As cause will be obey'd. Please you to march
And four shall quickly draw out my command,
Which men are best inclined.
March on, my fellows:
Make good this ostentation, and you shall
Divide in all with us.
Exeunt
SCENE VII. The gates of Corioli.
TITUS LARTIUS, having set a guard upon  Corioli, going with drum and trumpet toward  COMINIUS and CAIUS MARCIUS, enters with Lieutenant, other Soldiers, and a Scout
So, let the ports be guarded: keep your duties,
As I have set them down. If I do send, dispatch
Those centuries to our aid: the rest will serve
For a short holding: if we lose the field,
We cannot keep the town.
Fear not our care, sir.
Hence, and shut your gates upon's.
Our guider, come
Exeunt
SCENE VIII. A field of battle.
Alarum as in battle. Enter, from opposite sides, MARCIUS and AUFIDIUS
I'll fight with none but thee
Worse than a promise-breaker.
We hate alike:
Not Afric owns a serpent I abhor
More than thy fame and envy. Fix thy foot.
Let the first budger die the other's slave,
And the gods doom him after!
If I fly, Marcius,
Holloa me like a hare.
Within these three hours, Tullus,
Alone I fought in your Corioli walls,
And made what work I pleased: 'tis not my blood
Wherein thou seest me mask'd
Wrench up thy power to the highest.
Wert thou the Hector
That was the whip of your bragg'd progeny,
Thou shouldst not scape me here.
They fight, and certain Volsces come to the aid of  AUFIDIUS. MARCIUS fights till they be driven in breathless
Officious, and not valiant, you have shamed me
In your condemned seconds.
Exeunt
SCENE IX. The Roman camp.
Flourish. Alarum. A retreat is sounded. Flourish.  Enter, from one side, COMINIUS with the Romans
If I should tell thee o'er this thy day's work,
Thou'ldst not believe thy deeds: but I'll report it
Where senators shall mingle tears with smiles,
Where great patricians shall attend and shrug,
I' the end admire, where ladies shall be frighted,
And, gladly quaked, hear more
dull tribunes,
That, with the fusty plebeians, hate thine honours,
Shall say against their hearts 'We thank the gods
Our Rome hath such a soldier.'
Yet camest thou to a morsel of this feast,
Having fully dined before.
Enter TITUS LARTIUS, with his power, from the pursuit
O general,
Here is the steed, we the caparison:
Hadst thou beheld--
Pray now, no more: my mother,
Who has a charter to extol her blood,
When she does praise me grieves me. I have done
As you have done
As you have been
He that has but effected his good will
Hath overta'en mine act.
You shall not be
The grave of your deserving
The value of her own: 'twere a concealment
Worse than a theft, no less than a traducement,
To hide your doings
Which, to the spire and top of praises vouch'd,
Would seem but modest: therefore, I beseech you
In sign of what you are, not to reward
What you have done--before our army hear me.
I have some wounds upon me, and they smart
To hear themselves remember'd.
Should they not,
Well might they fester 'gainst ingratitude,
And tent themselves with death. Of all the horses,
Whereof we have ta'en good and good store, of all
The treasure in this field achieved and city,
We render you the tenth, to be ta'en forth,
Before the common distribution, at
Your only choice.
I thank you, general
But cannot make my heart consent to take
A bribe to pay my sword: I do refuse it
And stand upon my common part with those
That have beheld the doing.
A long flourish. They all cry 'Marcius! Marcius!'  cast up their caps and lances: COMINIUS and LARTIUS stand bare
May these same instruments, which you profane,
Never sound more! when drums and trumpets shall
I' the field prove flatterers, let courts and cities be
Made all of false-faced soothing!
When steel grows soft as the parasite's silk,
Let him be made a coverture for the wars!
No more, I say! For that I have not wash'd
My nose that bled, or foil'd some debile wretch.--
Which, without note, here's many else have done,--
You shout me forth
In acclamations hyperbolical
As if I loved my little should be dieted
In praises sauced with lies.
Too modest are you
More cruel to your good report than grateful
To us that give you truly: by your patience,
If 'gainst yourself you be incensed, we'll put you,
Like one that means his proper harm, in manacles,
Then reason safely with you. Therefore, be it known,
As to us, to all the world, that Caius Marcius
Wears this war's garland: in token of the which,
My noble steed, known to the camp, I give him,
With all his trim belonging
For what he did before Corioli, call him,
With all the applause and clamour of the host,
CAIUS MARCIUS CORIOLANUS! Bear
The addition nobly ever!
Flourish. Trumpets sound, and drums
Caius Marcius Coriolanus!
I will go wash
And when my face is fair, you shall perceive
Whether I blush or no: howbeit, I thank you.
I mean to stride your steed, and at all times
To undercrest your good addition
To the fairness of my power.
So, to our tent
Where, ere we do repose us, we will write
To Rome of our success. You, Titus Lartius,
Must to Corioli back: send us to Rome
The best, with whom we may articulate,
For their own good and ours.
I shall, my lord.
The gods begin to mock me. I, that now
Refused most princely gifts, am bound to beg
Of my lord general.
Take't
I sometime lay here in Corioli
At a poor man's house
He cried to me
But then Aufidius was with in my view,
And wrath o'erwhelm'd my pity: I request you
To give my poor host freedom.
O, well begg'd!
Were he the butcher of my son, he should
Be free as is the wind. Deliver him, Titus.
Marcius, his name?
By Jupiter! forgot.
I am weary
Have we no wine here?
Go we to our tent:
The blood upon your visage dries
It should be look'd to: come.
Exeunt
SCENE X. The camp of the Volsces.
A flourish. Cornets. Enter TULLUS AUFIDIUS, bloody, with two or three Soldiers
The town is ta'en!
'Twill be deliver'd back on good condition.
Condition!
I would I were a Roman
Being a Volsce, be that I am. Condition!
What good condition can a treaty find
I' the part that is at mercy? Five times, Marcius,
I have fought with thee: so often hast thou beat me,
And wouldst do so, I think, should we encounter
As often as we eat. By the elements,
If e'er again I meet him beard to beard,
He's mine, or I am his: mine emulation
Hath not that honour in't it had
I thought to crush him in an equal force,
True sword to sword, I'll potch at him some way
Or wrath or craft may get him.
He's the devil.
Bolder, though not so subtle. My valour's poison'd
With only suffering stain by him
Shall fly out of itself: nor sleep nor sanctuary,
Being naked, sick, nor fane nor Capitol,
The prayers of priests nor times of sacrifice,
Embarquements all of fury, shall lift up
Their rotten privilege and custom 'gainst
My hate to Marcius: where I find him, were it
At home, upon my brother's guard, even there,
Against the hospitable canon, would I
Wash my fierce hand in's heart. Go you to the city
Learn how 'tis held
Be hostages for Rome.
Will not you go?
I am attended at the cypress grove: I pray you--
'Tis south the city mills--bring me word thither
How the world goes, that to the pace of it
I may spur on my journey.
I shall, sir.
Exeunt
ACT II
SCENE I. Rome. A public place.
Enter MENENIUS with the two Tribunes of the people, SICINIUS and BRUTUS.
The augurer tells me we shall have news to-night.
Good or bad?
Not according to the prayer of the people, for they
love not Marcius.
Nature teaches beasts to know their friends.
Pray you, who does the wolf love?
The lamb.
Ay, to devour him
noble Marcius.
He's a lamb indeed, that baes like a bear.
He's a bear indeed, that lives like a lamb. You two
are old men: tell me one thing that I shall ask you.
Well, sir.
In what enormity is Marcius poor in, that you two
have not in abundance?
He's poor in no one fault, but stored with all.
Especially in pride.
And topping all others in boasting.
This is strange now: do you two know how you are
censured here in the city, I mean of us o' the
right-hand file? do you?
Why, how are we censured?
Because you talk of pride now,--will you not be angry?
Well, well, sir, well.
Why, 'tis no great matter
occasion will rob you of a great deal of patience:
give your dispositions the reins, and be angry at
your pleasures
pleasure to you in being so. You blame Marcius for
being proud?
We do it not alone, sir.
I know you can do very little alone
are many, or else your actions would grow wondrous
single: your abilities are too infant-like for
doing much alone. You talk of pride: O that you
could turn your eyes toward the napes of your necks,
and make but an interior survey of your good selves!
O that you could!
What then, sir?
Why, then you should discover a brace of unmeriting,
proud, violent, testy magistrates, alias fools, as
any in Rome.
Menenius, you are known well enough too.
I am known to be a humorous patrician, and one that
loves a cup of hot wine with not a drop of allaying
Tiber in't
favouring the first complaint
upon too trivial motion
with the buttock of the night than with the forehead
of the morning: what I think I utter, and spend my
malice in my breath. Meeting two such wealsmen as
you are--I cannot call you Lycurguses--if the drink
you give me touch my palate adversely, I make a
crooked face at it. I can't say your worships have
delivered the matter well, when I find the ass in
compound with the major part of your syllables: and
though I must be content to bear with those that say
you are reverend grave men, yet they lie deadly that
tell you you have good faces. If you see this in
the map of my microcosm, follows it that I am known
well enough too? what barm can your bisson
conspectuities glean out of this character, if I be
known well enough too?
Come, sir, come, we know you well enough.
You know neither me, yourselves nor any thing. You
are ambitious for poor knaves' caps and legs: you
wear out a good wholesome forenoon in hearing a
cause between an orange wife and a fosset-seller
and then rejourn the controversy of three pence to a
second day of audience. When you are hearing a
matter between party and party, if you chance to be
pinched with the colic, you make faces like
mummers
patience
dismiss the controversy bleeding the more entangled
by your hearing: all the peace you make in their
cause is, calling both the parties knaves. You are
a pair of strange ones.
Come, come, you are well understood to be a
perfecter giber for the table than a necessary
bencher in the Capitol.
Our very priests must become mockers, if they shall
encounter such ridiculous subjects as you are. When
you speak best unto the purpose, it is not worth the
wagging of your beards
so honourable a grave as to stuff a botcher's
cushion, or to be entombed in an ass's pack-
saddle. Yet you must be saying, Marcius is proud
who in a cheap estimation, is worth predecessors
since Deucalion, though peradventure some of the
best of 'em were hereditary hangmen. God-den to
your worships: more of your conversation would
infect my brain, being the herdsmen of the beastly
plebeians: I will be bold to take my leave of you.
BRUTUS and SICINIUS go aside
Enter VOLUMNIA, VIRGILIA, and VALERIA
How now, my as fair as noble ladies,--and the moon,
were she earthly, no nobler,--whither do you follow
your eyes so fast?
Honourable Menenius, my boy Marcius approaches
the love of Juno, let's go.
Ha! Marcius coming home!
Ay, worthy Menenius
approbation.
Take my cap, Jupiter, and I thank thee. Hoo!
Marcius coming home!
Nay,'tis true.
Look, here's a letter from him: the state hath
another, his wife another
at home for you.
I will make my very house reel tonight: a letter for
me!
Yes, certain, there's a letter for you
A letter for me! it gives me an estate of seven
years' health
the physician: the most sovereign prescription in
Galen is but empiricutic, and, to this preservative,
of no better report than a horse-drench. Is he
not wounded? he was wont to come home wounded.
O, no, no, no.
O, he is wounded
So do I too, if it be not too much: brings a'
victory in his pocket? the wounds become him.
On's brows: Menenius, he comes the third time home
with the oaken garland.
Has he disciplined Aufidius soundly?
Titus Lartius writes, they fought together, but
Aufidius got off.
And 'twas time for him too, I'll warrant him that:
an he had stayed by him, I would not have been so
fidiused for all the chests in Corioli, and the gold
that's in them. Is the senate possessed of this?
Good ladies, let's go. Yes, yes, yes
has letters from the general, wherein he gives my
son the whole name of the war: he hath in this
action outdone his former deeds doubly
In troth, there's wondrous things spoke of him.
Wondrous! ay, I warrant you, and not without his
true purchasing.
The gods grant them true!
True! pow, wow.
True! I'll be sworn they are true.
Where is he wounded?
To the Tribunes
God save your good worships! Marcius is coming
home: he has more cause to be proud. Where is he wounded?
I' the shoulder and i' the left arm there will be
large cicatrices to show the people, when he shall
stand for his place. He received in the repulse of
Tarquin seven hurts i' the body.
One i' the neck, and two i' the thigh,--there's
nine that I know.
He had, before this last expedition, twenty-five
wounds upon him.
Now it's twenty-seven: every gash was an enemy's grave.
A shout and flourish
Hark! the trumpets.
These are the ushers of Marcius: before him he
carries noise, and behind him he leaves tears:
Death, that dark spirit, in 's nervy arm doth lie
Which, being advanced, declines, and then men die.
A sennet. Trumpets sound. Enter COMINIUS the  general, and TITUS LARTIUS
Know, Rome, that all alone Marcius did fight
Within Corioli gates: where he hath won,
With fame, a name to Caius Marcius
In honour follows Coriolanus.
Welcome to Rome, renowned Coriolanus!
Flourish
Welcome to Rome, renowned Coriolanus!
No more of this
Pray now, no more.
Look, sir, your mother!
O,
You have, I know, petition'd all the gods
For my prosperity!
Kneels
Nay, my good soldier, up
My gentle Marcius, worthy Caius, and
By deed-achieving honour newly named,--
What is it?--Coriolanus must I call thee?--
But O, thy wife!
My gracious silence, hail!
Wouldst thou have laugh'd had I come coffin'd home,
That weep'st to see me triumph? Ay, my dear,
Such eyes the widows in Corioli wear,
And mothers that lack sons.
Now, the gods crown thee!
And live you yet?
To VALERIA
O my sweet lady, pardon.
I know not where to turn: O, welcome home:
And welcome, general: and ye're welcome all.
A hundred thousand welcomes. I could weep
And I could laugh, I am light and heavy. Welcome.
A curse begin at very root on's heart,
That is not glad to see thee! You are three
That Rome should dote on: yet, by the faith of men,
We have some old crab-trees here
at home that will not
Be grafted to your relish. Yet welcome, warriors:
We call a nettle but a nettle and
The faults of fools but folly.
Ever right.
Menenius ever, ever.
Give way there, and go on!
[To VOLUMNIA and VIRGILIA]  Your hand, and yours:
Ere in our own house I do shade my head,
The good patricians must be visited
From whom I have received not only greetings,
But with them change of honours.
I have lived
To see inherited my very wishes
And the buildings of my fancy: only
There's one thing wanting, which I doubt not but
Our Rome will cast upon thee.
Know, good mother,
I had rather be their servant in my way,
Than sway with them in theirs.
On, to the Capitol!
Flourish. Cornets. Exeunt in state, as before. BRUTUS and SICINIUS come forward
All tongues speak of him, and the bleared sights
Are spectacled to see him: your prattling nurse
Into a rapture lets her baby cry
While she chats him: the kitchen malkin pins
Her richest lockram 'bout her reechy neck,
Clambering the walls to eye him: stalls, bulks, windows,
Are smother'd up, leads fill'd, and ridges horsed
With variable complexions, all agreeing
In earnestness to see him: seld-shown flamens
Do press among the popular throngs and puff
To win a vulgar station: or veil'd dames
Commit the war of white and damask in
Their nicely-gawded cheeks to the wanton spoil
Of Phoebus' burning kisses: such a pother
As if that whatsoever god who leads him
Were slily crept into his human powers
And gave him graceful posture.
On the sudden,
I warrant him consul.
Then our office may,
During his power, go sleep.
He cannot temperately transport his honours
From where he should begin and end, but will
Lose those he hath won.
In that there's comfort.
Doubt not
The commoners, for whom we stand, but they
Upon their ancient malice will forget
With the least cause these his new honours, which
That he will give them make I as little question
As he is proud to do't.
I heard him swear,
Were he to stand for consul, never would he
Appear i' the market-place nor on him put
The napless vesture of humility
Nor showing, as the manner is, his wounds
To the people, beg their stinking breaths.
'Tis right.
It was his word: O, he would miss it rather
Than carry it but by the suit of the gentry to him,
And the desire of the nobles.
I wish no better
Than have him hold that purpose and to put it
In execution.
'Tis most like he will.
It shall be to him then as our good wills,
A sure destruction.
So it must fall out
To him or our authorities. For an end,
We must suggest the people in what hatred
He still hath held them
Have made them mules, silenced their pleaders and
Dispropertied their freedoms, holding them,
In human action and capacity,
Of no more soul nor fitness for the world
Than camels in the war, who have their provand
Only for bearing burdens, and sore blows
For sinking under them.
This, as you say, suggested
At some time when his soaring insolence
Shall touch the people--which time shall not want,
If he be put upon 't
As to set dogs on sheep--will be his fire
To kindle their dry stubble
Shall darken him for ever.
Enter a Messenger
What's the matter?
You are sent for to the Capitol. 'Tis thought
That Marcius shall be consul:
I have seen the dumb men throng to see him and
The blind to bear him speak: matrons flung gloves,
Ladies and maids their scarfs and handkerchers,
Upon him as he pass'd: the nobles bended,
As to Jove's statue, and the commons made
A shower and thunder with their caps and shouts:
I never saw the like.
Let's to the Capitol
And carry with us ears and eyes for the time,
But hearts for the event.
Have with you.
Exeunt
SCENE II. The same. The Capitol.
Enter two Officers, to lay cushions
Come, come, they are almost here. How many stand
for consulships?
Three, they say: but 'tis thought of every one
Coriolanus will carry it.
That's a brave fellow
loves not the common people.
Faith, there had been many great men that have
flattered the people, who ne'er loved them
be many that they have loved, they know not
wherefore: so that, if they love they know not why,
they hate upon no better a ground: therefore, for
Coriolanus neither to care whether they love or hate
him manifests the true knowledge he has in their
disposition
them plainly see't.
If he did not care whether he had their love or no,
he waved indifferently 'twixt doing them neither
good nor harm: but he seeks their hate with greater
devotion than can render it him
nothing undone that may fully discover him their
opposite. Now, to seem to affect the malice and
displeasure of the people is as bad as that which he
dislikes, to flatter them for their love.
He hath deserved worthily of his country: and his
ascent is not by such easy degrees as those who,
having been supple and courteous to the people,
bonneted, without any further deed to have them at
an into their estimation and report: but he hath so
planted his honours in their eyes, and his actions
in their hearts, that for their tongues to be
silent, and not confess so much, were a kind of
ingrateful injury
malice, that, giving itself the lie, would pluck
reproof and rebuke from every ear that heard it.
No more of him
are coming.
A sennet. Enter, with actors before them, COMINIUS  the consul, MENENIUS, CORIOLANUS, Senators,  SICINIUS and BRUTUS. The Senators take their  places
Having determined of the Volsces and
To send for Titus Lartius, it remains,
As the main point of this our after-meeting,
To gratify his noble service that
Hath thus stood for his country: therefore,
please you,
Most reverend and grave elders, to desire
The present consul, and last general
In our well-found successes, to report
A little of that worthy work perform'd
By Caius Marcius Coriolanus, whom
We met here both to thank and to remember
With honours like himself.
Speak, good Cominius:
Leave nothing out for length, and make us think
Rather our state's defective for requital
Than we to stretch it out.
To the Tribunes
Masters o' the people,
We do request your kindest ears, and after,
Your loving motion toward the common body,
To yield what passes here.
We are convented
Upon a pleasing treaty, and have hearts
Inclinable to honour and advance
The theme of our assembly.
Which the rather
We shall be blest to do, if he remember
A kinder value of the people than
He hath hereto prized them at.
That's off, that's off
I would you rather had been silent. Please you
To hear Cominius speak?
Most willingly
But yet my caution was more pertinent
Than the rebuke you give it.
He loves your people
But tie him not to be their bedfellow.
Worthy Cominius, speak.
CORIOLANUS offers to go away
Nay, keep your place.
Sit, Coriolanus
What you have nobly done.
Your horror's pardon:
I had rather have my wounds to heal again
Than hear say how I got them.
Sir, I hope
My words disbench'd you not.
No, sir: yet oft,
When blows have made me stay, I fled from words.
You soothed not, therefore hurt not: but
your people,
I love them as they weigh.
Pray now, sit down.
I had rather have one scratch my head i' the sun
When the alarum were struck than idly sit
To hear my nothings monster'd.
Exit
Masters of the people,
Your multiplying spawn how can he flatter--
That's thousand to one good one--when you now see
He had rather venture all his limbs for honour
Than one on's ears to hear it? Proceed, Cominius.
I shall lack voice: the deeds of Coriolanus
Should not be utter'd feebly. It is held
That valour is the chiefest virtue, and
Most dignifies the haver: if it be,
The man I speak of cannot in the world
Be singly counterpoised. At sixteen years,
When Tarquin made a head for Rome, he fought
Beyond the mark of others: our then dictator,
Whom with all praise I point at, saw him fight,
When with his Amazonian chin he drove
The bristled lips before him: be bestrid
An o'er-press'd Roman and i' the consul's view
Slew three opposers: Tarquin's self he met,
And struck him on his knee: in that day's feats,
When he might act the woman in the scene,
He proved best man i' the field, and for his meed
Was brow-bound with the oak. His pupil age
Man-enter'd thus, he waxed like a sea,
And in the brunt of seventeen battles since
He lurch'd all swords of the garland. For this last,
Before and in Corioli, let me say,
I cannot speak him home: he stopp'd the fliers
And by his rare example made the coward
Turn terror into sport: as weeds before
A vessel under sail, so men obey'd
And fell below his stem: his sword, death's stamp,
Where it did mark, it took
He was a thing of blood, whose every motion
Was timed with dying cries: alone he enter'd
The mortal gate of the city, which he painted
With shunless destiny
And with a sudden reinforcement struck
Corioli like a planet: now all's his:
When, by and by, the din of war gan pierce
His ready sense
Re-quicken'd what in flesh was fatigate,
And to the battle came he
Run reeking o'er the lives of men, as if
'Twere a perpetual spoil: and till we call'd
Both field and city ours, he never stood
To ease his breast with panting.
Worthy man!
He cannot but with measure fit the honours
Which we devise him.
Our spoils he kick'd at,
And look'd upon things precious as they were
The common muck of the world: he covets less
Than misery itself would give
His deeds with doing them, and is content
To spend the time to end it.
He's right noble:
Let him be call'd for.
Call Coriolanus.
He doth appear.
Re-enter CORIOLANUS
The senate, Coriolanus, are well pleased
To make thee consul.
I do owe them still
My life and services.
It then remains
That you do speak to the people.
I do beseech you,
Let me o'erleap that custom, for I cannot
Put on the gown, stand naked and entreat them,
For my wounds' sake, to give their suffrage: please you
That I may pass this doing.
Sir, the people
Must have their voices
One jot of ceremony.
Put them not to't:
Pray you, go fit you to the custom and
Take to you, as your predecessors have,
Your honour with your form.
It is apart
That I shall blush in acting, and might well
Be taken from the people.
Mark you that?
To brag unto them, thus I did, and thus
Show them the unaching scars which I should hide,
As if I had received them for the hire
Of their breath only!
Do not stand upon't.
We recommend to you, tribunes of the people,
Our purpose to them: and to our noble consul
Wish we all joy and honour.
To Coriolanus come all joy and honour!
Flourish of cornets. Exeunt all but SICINIUS and BRUTUS
You see how he intends to use the people.
May they perceive's intent! He will require them,
As if he did contemn what he requested
Should be in them to give.
Come, we'll inform them
Of our proceedings here: on the marketplace,
I know, they do attend us.
Exeunt
SCENE III. The same. The Forum.
Enter seven or eight Citizens
Once, if he do require our voices, we ought not to deny him.
We may, sir, if we will.
We have power in ourselves to do it, but it is a
power that we have no power to do
his wounds and tell us his deeds, we are to put our
tongues into those wounds and speak for them
he tell us his noble deeds, we must also tell him
our noble acceptance of them. Ingratitude is
monstrous, and for the multitude to be ingrateful,
were to make a monster of the multitude: of the
which we being members, should bring ourselves to be
monstrous members.
And to make us no better thought of, a little help
will serve
himself stuck not to call us the many-headed multitude.
We have been called so of many
are some brown, some black, some auburn, some bald,
but that our wits are so diversely coloured: and
truly I think if all our wits were to issue out of
one skull, they would fly east, west, north, south,
and their consent of one direct way should be at
once to all the points o' the compass.
Think you so? Which way do you judge my wit would
fly?
Nay, your wit will not so soon out as another man's
will
if it were at liberty, 'twould, sure, southward.
Why that way?
To lose itself in a fog, where being three parts
melted away with rotten dews, the fourth would return
for conscience sake, to help to get thee a wife.
You are never without your tricks: you may, you may.
Are you all resolved to give your voices? But
that's no matter, the greater part carries it. I
say, if he would incline to the people, there was
never a worthier man.
Enter CORIOLANUS in a gown of humility, with MENENIUS
Here he comes, and in the gown of humility: mark his
behavior. We are not to stay all together, but to
come by him where he stands, by ones, by twos, and
by threes. He's to make his requests by
particulars
honour, in giving him our own voices with our own
tongues: therefore follow me, and I direct you how
you shall go by him.
Content, content.
Exeunt Citizens
O sir, you are not right: have you not known
The worthiest men have done't?
What must I say?
'I Pray, sir'--Plague upon't! I cannot bring
My tongue to such a pace:--'Look, sir, my wounds!
I got them in my country's service, when
Some certain of your brethren roar'd and ran
From the noise of our own drums.'
O me, the gods!
You must not speak of that: you must desire them
To think upon you.
Think upon me! hang 'em!
I would they would forget me, like the virtues
Which our divines lose by 'em.
You'll mar all:
I'll leave you: pray you, speak to 'em, I pray you,
In wholesome manner.
Exit
Bid them wash their faces
And keep their teeth clean.
Re-enter two of the Citizens
So, here comes a brace.
Re-enter a third Citizen
You know the cause, air, of my standing here.
We do, sir
Mine own desert.
Your own desert!
Ay, but not mine own desire.
How not your own desire?
No, sir,'twas never my desire yet to trouble the
poor with begging.
You must think, if we give you any thing, we hope to
gain by you.
Well then, I pray, your price o' the consulship?
The price is to ask it kindly.
Kindly! Sir, I pray, let me ha't: I have wounds to
show you, which shall be yours in private. Your
good voice, sir
You shall ha' it, worthy sir.
A match, sir. There's in all two worthy voices
begged. I have your alms: adieu.
But this is something odd.
An 'twere to give again,--but 'tis no matter.
Exeunt the three Citizens
Re-enter two other Citizens
Pray you now, if it may stand with the tune of your
voices that I may be consul, I have here the
customary gown.
You have deserved nobly of your country, and you
have not deserved nobly.
Your enigma?
You have been a scourge to her enemies, you have
been a rod to her friends
the common people.
You should account me the more virtuous that I have
not been common in my love. I will, sir, flatter my
sworn brother, the people, to earn a dearer
estimation of them
gentle: and since the wisdom of their choice is
rather to have my hat than my heart, I will practise
the insinuating nod and be off to them most
counterfeitly
bewitchment of some popular man and give it
bountiful to the desirers. Therefore, beseech you,
I may be consul.
We hope to find you our friend
you our voices heartily.
You have received many wounds for your country.
I will not seal your knowledge with showing them. I
will make much of your voices, and so trouble you no further.
The gods give you joy, sir, heartily!
Exeunt
Most sweet voices!
Better it is to die, better to starve,
Than crave the hire which first we do deserve.
Why in this woolvish toge should I stand here,
To beg of Hob and Dick, that do appear,
Their needless vouches? Custom calls me to't:
What custom wills, in all things should we do't,
The dust on antique time would lie unswept,
And mountainous error be too highly heapt
For truth to o'er-peer. Rather than fool it so,
Let the high office and the honour go
To one that would do thus. I am half through
The one part suffer'd, the other will I do.
Re-enter three Citizens more
Here come more voices.
Your voices: for your voices I have fought
Watch'd for your voices
Of wounds two dozen odd
I have seen and heard of
Done many things, some less, some more your voices:
Indeed I would be consul.
He has done nobly, and cannot go without any honest
man's voice.
Therefore let him be consul: the gods give him joy,
and make him good friend to the people!
Amen, amen. God save thee, noble consul!
Exeunt
Worthy voices!
Re-enter MENENIUS, with BRUTUS and SICINIUS
You have stood your limitation
Endue you with the people's voice: remains
That, in the official marks invested, you
Anon do meet the senate.
Is this done?
The custom of request you have discharged:
The people do admit you, and are summon'd
To meet anon, upon your approbation.
Where? at the senate-house?
There, Coriolanus.
May I change these garments?
You may, sir.
That I'll straight do
Repair to the senate-house.
I'll keep you company. Will you along?
We stay here for the people.
Fare you well.
Exeunt CORIOLANUS and MENENIUS
He has it now, and by his looks methink
'Tis warm at 's heart.
With a proud heart he wore his humble weeds.
will you dismiss the people?
Re-enter Citizens
How now, my masters! have you chose this man?
He has our voices, sir.
We pray the gods he may deserve your loves.
Amen, sir: to my poor unworthy notice,
He mock'd us when he begg'd our voices.
Certainly
He flouted us downright.
No,'tis his kind of speech: he did not mock us.
Not one amongst us, save yourself, but says
He used us scornfully: he should have show'd us
His marks of merit, wounds received for's country.
Why, so he did, I am sure.
No, no
He said he had wounds, which he could show
in private
And with his hat, thus waving it in scorn,
'I would be consul,' says he: 'aged custom,
But by your voices, will not so permit me
Your voices therefore.' When we granted that,
Here was 'I thank you for your voices: thank you:
Your most sweet voices: now you have left
your voices,
I have no further with you.' Was not this mockery?
Why either were you ignorant to see't,
Or, seeing it, of such childish friendliness
To yield your voices?
Could you not have told him
As you were lesson'd, when he had no power,
But was a petty servant to the state,
He was your enemy, ever spake against
Your liberties and the charters that you bear
I' the body of the weal
A place of potency and sway o' the state,
If he should still malignantly remain
Fast foe to the plebeii, your voices might
Be curses to yourselves? You should have said
That as his worthy deeds did claim no less
Than what he stood for, so his gracious nature
Would think upon you for your voices and
Translate his malice towards you into love,
Standing your friendly lord.
Thus to have said,
As you were fore-advised, had touch'd his spirit
And tried his inclination
Either his gracious promise, which you might,
As cause had call'd you up, have held him to
Or else it would have gall'd his surly nature,
Which easily endures not article
Tying him to aught
You should have ta'en the advantage of his choler
And pass'd him unelected.
Did you perceive
He did solicit you in free contempt
When he did need your loves, and do you think
That his contempt shall not be bruising to you,
When he hath power to crush? Why, had your bodies
No heart among you? or had you tongues to cry
Against the rectorship of judgment?
Have you
Ere now denied the asker? and now again
Of him that did not ask, but mock, bestow
Your sued-for tongues?
He's not confirm'd
And will deny him:
I'll have five hundred voices of that sound.
I twice five hundred and their friends to piece 'em.
Get you hence instantly, and tell those friends,
They have chose a consul that will from them take
Their liberties
Than dogs that are as often beat for barking
As therefore kept to do so.
Let them assemble,
And on a safer judgment all revoke
Your ignorant election
And his old hate unto you
With what contempt he wore the humble weed,
How in his suit he scorn'd you
Thinking upon his services, took from you
The apprehension of his present portance,
Which most gibingly, ungravely, he did fashion
After the inveterate hate he bears you.
Lay
A fault on us, your tribunes
No impediment between, but that you must
Cast your election on him.
Say, you chose him
More after our commandment than as guided
By your own true affections, and that your minds,
Preoccupied with what you rather must do
Than what you should, made you against the grain
To voice him consul: lay the fault on us.
Ay, spare us not. Say we read lectures to you.
How youngly he began to serve his country,
How long continued, and what stock he springs of,
The noble house o' the Marcians, from whence came
That Ancus Marcius, Numa's daughter's son,
Who, after great Hostilius, here was king
Of the same house Publius and Quintus were,
That our beat water brought by conduits hither
And  [Censorinus,]  nobly named so,
Twice being  [by the people chosen]  censor,
Was his great ancestor.
One thus descended,
That hath beside well in his person wrought
To be set high in place, we did commend
To your remembrances: but you have found,
Scaling his present bearing with his past,
That he's your fixed enemy, and revoke
Your sudden approbation.
Say, you ne'er had done't--
Harp on that still--but by our putting on
And presently, when you have drawn your number,
Repair to the Capitol.
We will so: almost all
Repent in their election.
Exeunt Citizens
Let them go on
This mutiny were better put in hazard,
Than stay, past doubt, for greater:
If, as his nature is, he fall in rage
With their refusal, both observe and answer
The vantage of his anger.
To the Capitol, come:
We will be there before the stream o' the people
And this shall seem, as partly 'tis, their own,
Which we have goaded onward.
Exeunt
ACT III
SCENE I. Rome. A street.
Cornets. Enter CORIOLANUS, MENENIUS, all the Gentry, COMINIUS, TITUS LARTIUS, and other Senators
Tullus Aufidius then had made new head?
He had, my lord
Our swifter composition.
So then the Volsces stand but as at first,
Ready, when time shall prompt them, to make road.
Upon's again.
They are worn, lord consul, so,
That we shall hardly in our ages see
Their banners wave again.
Saw you Aufidius?
On safe-guard he  came to me
Against the Volsces, for they had so vilely
Yielded the town: he is retired to Antium.
Spoke he of me?
He did, my lord.
How? what?
How often he had met you, sword to sword
That of all things upon the earth he hated
Your person most, that he would pawn his fortunes
To hopeless restitution, so he might
Be call'd your vanquisher.
At Antium lives he?
At Antium.
I wish I had a cause to seek him there,
To oppose his hatred fully. Welcome home.
Enter SICINIUS and BRUTUS
Behold, these are the tribunes of the people,
The tongues o' the common mouth: I do despise them
For they do prank them in authority,
Against all noble sufferance.
Pass no further.
Ha! what is that?
It will be dangerous to go on: no further.
What makes this change?
The matter?
Hath he not pass'd the noble and the common?
Cominius, no.
Have I had children's voices?
Tribunes, give way
The people are incensed against him.
Stop,
Or all will fall in broil.
Are these your herd?
Must these have voices, that can yield them now
And straight disclaim their tongues? What are
your offices?
You being their mouths, why rule you not their teeth?
Have you not set them on?
Be calm, be calm.
It is a purposed thing, and grows by plot,
To curb the will of the nobility:
Suffer't, and live with such as cannot rule
Nor ever will be ruled.
Call't not a plot:
The people cry you mock'd them, and of late,
When corn was given them gratis, you repined
Scandal'd the suppliants for the people, call'd them
Time-pleasers, flatterers, foes to nobleness.
Why, this was known before.
Not to them all.
Have you inform'd them sithence?
How! I inform them!
You are like to do such business.
Not unlike,
Each way, to better yours.
Why then should I be consul? By yond clouds,
Let me deserve so ill as you, and make me
Your fellow tribune.
You show too much of that
For which the people stir: if you will pass
To where you are bound, you must inquire your way,
Which you are out of, with a gentler spirit,
Or never be so noble as a consul,
Nor yoke with him for tribune.
Let's be calm.
The people are abused
Becomes not Rome, nor has Coriolanus
Deserved this so dishonour'd rub, laid falsely
I' the plain way of his merit.
Tell me of corn!
This was my speech, and I will speak't again--
Not now, not now.
Not in this heat, sir, now.
Now, as I live, I will. My nobler friends,
I crave their pardons:
For the mutable, rank-scented many, let them
Regard me as I do not flatter, and
Therein behold themselves: I say again,
In soothing them, we nourish 'gainst our senate
The cockle of rebellion, insolence, sedition,
Which we ourselves have plough'd for, sow'd,
and scatter'd,
By mingling them with us, the honour'd number,
Who lack not virtue, no, nor power, but that
Which they have given to beggars.
Well, no more.
No more words, we beseech you.
How! no more!
As for my country I have shed my blood,
Not fearing outward force, so shall my lungs
Coin words till their decay against those measles,
Which we disdain should tatter us, yet sought
The very way to catch them.
You speak o' the people,
As if you were a god to punish, not
A man of their infirmity.
'Twere well
We let the people know't.
What, what? his choler?
Choler!
Were I as patient as the midnight sleep,
By Jove, 'twould be my mind!
It is a mind
That shall remain a poison where it is,
Not poison any further.
Shall remain!
Hear you this Triton of the minnows? mark you
His absolute 'shall'?
'Twas from the canon.
'Shall'!
O good but most unwise patricians! why,
You grave but reckless senators, have you thus
Given Hydra here to choose an officer,
That with his peremptory 'shall,' being but
The horn and noise o' the monster's, wants not spirit
To say he'll turn your current in a ditch,
And make your channel his? If he have power
Then vail your ignorance
Your dangerous lenity. If you are learn'd,
Be not as common fools
Let them have cushions by you. You are plebeians,
If they be senators: and they are no less,
When, both your voices blended, the great'st taste
Most palates theirs. They choose their magistrate,
And such a one as he, who puts his 'shall,'
His popular 'shall' against a graver bench
Than ever frown in Greece. By Jove himself!
It makes the consuls base: and my soul aches
To know, when two authorities are up,
Neither supreme, how soon confusion
May enter 'twixt the gap of both and take
The one by the other.
Well, on to the market-place.
Whoever gave that counsel, to give forth
The corn o' the storehouse gratis, as 'twas used
Sometime in Greece,--
Well, well, no more of that.
Though there the people had more absolute power,
I say, they nourish'd disobedience, fed
The ruin of the state.
Why, shall the people give
One that speaks thus their voice?
I'll give my reasons,
More worthier than their voices. They know the corn
Was not our recompense, resting well assured
That ne'er did service for't: being press'd to the war,
Even when the navel of the state was touch'd,
They would not thread the gates. This kind of service
Did not deserve corn gratis. Being i' the war
Their mutinies and revolts, wherein they show'd
Most valour, spoke not for them: the accusation
Which they have often made against the senate,
All cause unborn, could never be the motive
Of our so frank donation. Well, what then?
How shall this bisson multitude digest
The senate's courtesy? Let deeds express
What's like to be their words: 'we did request it
We are the greater poll, and in true fear
They gave us our demands.' Thus we debase
The nature of our seats and make the rabble
Call our cares fears
Break ope the locks o' the senate and bring in
The crows to peck the eagles.
Come, enough.
Enough, with over-measure.
No, take more:
What may be sworn by, both divine and human,
Seal what I end withal! This double worship,
Where one part does disdain with cause, the other
Insult without all reason, where gentry, title, wisdom,
Cannot conclude but by the yea and no
Of general ignorance,--it must omit
Real necessities, and give way the while
To unstable slightness: purpose so barr'd,
it follows,
Nothing is done to purpose. Therefore, beseech you,--
You that will be less fearful than discreet,
That love the fundamental part of state
More than you doubt the change on't, that prefer
A noble life before a long, and wish
To jump a body with a dangerous physic
That's sure of death without it, at once pluck out
The multitudinous tongue
The sweet which is their poison: your dishonour
Mangles true judgment and bereaves the state
Of that integrity which should become't,
Not having the power to do the good it would,
For the in which doth control't.
Has said enough.
Has spoken like a traitor, and shall answer
As traitors do.
Thou wretch, despite o'erwhelm thee!
What should the people do with these bald tribunes?
On whom depending, their obedience fails
To the greater bench: in a rebellion,
When what's not meet, but what must be, was law,
Then were they chosen: in a better hour,
Let what is meet be said it must be meet,
And throw their power i' the dust.
Manifest treason!
This a consul? no.
The aediles, ho!
Enter an AEdile
Let him be apprehended.
Go, call the people:
Exit AEdile
in whose name myself
Attach thee as a traitorous innovator,
A foe to the public weal: obey, I charge thee,
And follow to thine answer.
Hence, old goat!
Senators,  and C	We'll surety him.
Aged sir, hands off.
Hence, rotten thing! or I shall shake thy bones
Out of thy garments.
Help, ye citizens!
Enter a rabble of Citizens (Plebeians), with the AEdiles
On both sides more respect.
Here's he that would take from you all your power.
Seize him, AEdiles!
Down with him! down with him!
Senators,  and C	Weapons, weapons, weapons!
They all bustle about CORIOLANUS, crying
'Tribunes!' 'Patricians!' 'Citizens!' 'What, ho!'
'Sicinius!' 'Brutus!' 'Coriolanus!' 'Citizens!'
'Peace, peace, peace!' 'Stay, hold, peace!'
What is about to be? I am out of breath
Confusion's near
To the people! Coriolanus, patience!
Speak, good Sicinius.
Hear me, people
Let's hear our tribune: peace Speak, speak, speak.
You are at point to lose your liberties:
Marcius would have all from you
Whom late you have named for consul.
Fie, fie, fie!
This is the way to kindle, not to quench.
To unbuild the city and to lay all flat.
What is the city but the people?
True,
The people are the city.
By the consent of all, we were establish'd
The people's magistrates.
You so remain.
And so are like to do.
That is the way to lay the city flat
To bring the roof to the foundation,
And bury all, which yet distinctly ranges,
In heaps and piles of ruin.
This deserves death.
Or let us stand to our authority,
Or let us lose it. We do here pronounce,
Upon the part o' the people, in whose power
We were elected theirs, Marcius is worthy
Of present death.
Therefore lay hold of him
Bear him to the rock Tarpeian, and from thence
Into destruction cast him.
AEdiles, seize him!
Yield, Marcius, yield!
Hear me one word
Beseech you, tribunes, hear me but a word.
Peace, peace!
[To BRUTUS]  Be that you seem, truly your
country's friend,
And temperately proceed to what you would
Thus violently redress.
Sir, those cold ways,
That seem like prudent helps, are very poisonous
Where the disease is violent. Lay hands upon him,
And bear him to the rock.
No, I'll die here.
Drawing his sword
There's some among you have beheld me fighting:
Come, try upon yourselves what you have seen me.
Down with that sword! Tribunes, withdraw awhile.
Lay hands upon him.
Help Marcius, help,
You that be noble
Down with him, down with him!
In this mutiny, the Tribunes, the AEdiles, and the People, are beat in
Go, get you to your house
All will be naught else.
Get you gone.
Stand fast
We have as many friends as enemies.
Sham it be put to that?
The gods forbid!
I prithee, noble friend, home to thy house
Leave us to cure this cause.
For 'tis a sore upon us,
You cannot tent yourself: be gone, beseech you.
Come, sir, along with us.
I would they were barbarians--as they are,
Though in Rome litter'd--not Romans--as they are not,
Though calved i' the porch o' the Capitol--
Be gone
Put not your worthy rage into your tongue
One time will owe another.
On fair ground
I could beat forty of them.
I could myself
Take up a brace o' the best of them
two tribunes:
But now 'tis odds beyond arithmetic
And manhood is call'd foolery, when it stands
Against a falling fabric. Will you hence,
Before the tag return? whose rage doth rend
Like interrupted waters and o'erbear
What they are used to bear.
Pray you, be gone:
I'll try whether my old wit be in request
With those that have but little: this must be patch'd
With cloth of any colour.
Nay, come away.
Exeunt CORIOLANUS, COMINIUS, and others
This man has marr'd his fortune.
His nature is too noble for the world:
He would not flatter Neptune for his trident,
Or Jove for's power to thunder. His heart's his mouth:
What his breast forges, that his tongue must vent
And, being angry, does forget that ever
He heard the name of death.
A noise within
Here's goodly work!
I would they were abed!
I would they were in Tiber! What the vengeance!
Could he not speak 'em fair?
Re-enter BRUTUS and SICINIUS, with the rabble
Where is this viper
That would depopulate the city and
Be every man himself?
You worthy tribunes,--
He shall be thrown down the Tarpeian rock
With rigorous hands: he hath resisted law,
And therefore law shall scorn him further trial
Than the severity of the public power
Which he so sets at nought.
He shall well know
The noble tribunes are the people's mouths,
And we their hands.
He shall, sure on't.
Sir, sir,--
Peace!
Do not cry havoc, where you should but hunt
With modest warrant.
Sir, how comes't that you
Have holp to make this rescue?
Hear me speak:
As I do know the consul's worthiness,
So can I name his faults,--
Consul! what consul?
The consul Coriolanus.
He consul!
No, no, no, no, no.
If, by the tribunes' leave, and yours, good people,
I may be heard, I would crave a word or two
The which shall turn you to no further harm
Than so much loss of time.
Speak briefly then
For we are peremptory to dispatch
This viperous traitor: to eject him hence
Were but one danger, and to keep him here
Our certain death: therefore it is decreed
He dies to-night.
Now the good gods forbid
That our renowned Rome, whose gratitude
Towards her deserved children is enroll'd
In Jove's own book, like an unnatural dam
Should now eat up her own!
He's a disease that must be cut away.
O, he's a limb that has but a disease
Mortal, to cut it off
What has he done to Rome that's worthy death?
Killing our enemies, the blood he hath lost--
Which, I dare vouch, is more than that he hath,
By many an ounce--he dropp'd it for his country
And what is left, to lose it by his country,
Were to us all, that do't and suffer it,
A brand to the end o' the world.
This is clean kam.
Merely awry: when he did love his country,
It honour'd him.
The service of the foot
Being once gangrened, is not then respected
For what before it was.
We'll hear no more.
Pursue him to his house, and pluck him thence:
Lest his infection, being of catching nature,
Spread further.
One word more, one word.
This tiger-footed rage, when it shall find
The harm of unscann'd swiftness, will too late
Tie leaden pounds to's heels. Proceed by process
Lest parties, as he is beloved, break out,
And sack great Rome with Romans.
If it were so,--
What do ye talk?
Have we not had a taste of his obedience?
Our aediles smote? ourselves resisted? Come.
Consider this: he has been bred i' the wars
Since he could draw a sword, and is ill school'd
In bolted language
He throws without distinction. Give me leave,
I'll go to him, and undertake to bring him
Where he shall answer, by a lawful form,
In peace, to his utmost peril.
Noble tribunes,
It is the humane way: the other course
Will prove too bloody, and the end of it
Unknown to the beginning.
Noble Menenius,
Be you then as the people's officer.
Masters, lay down your weapons.
Go not home.
Meet on the market-place. We'll attend you there:
Where, if you bring not Marcius, we'll proceed
In our first way.
I'll bring him to you.
To the Senators
Let me desire your company: he must come,
Or what is worst will follow.
Pray you, let's to him.
Exeunt
SCENE II. A room in CORIOLANUS'S house.
Enter CORIOLANUS with Patricians
Let them puff all about mine ears, present me
Death on the wheel or at wild horses' heels,
Or pile ten hills on the Tarpeian rock,
That the precipitation might down stretch
Below the beam of sight, yet will I still
Be thus to them.
You do the nobler.
I muse my mother
Does not approve me further, who was wont
To call them woollen vassals, things created
To buy and sell with groats, to show bare heads
In congregations, to yawn, be still and wonder,
When one but of my ordinance stood up
To speak of peace or war.
Enter VOLUMNIA
I talk of you:
Why did you wish me milder? would you have me
False to my nature? Rather say I play
The man I am.
O, sir, sir, sir,
I would have had you put your power well on,
Before you had worn it out.
Let go.
You might have been enough the man you are,
With striving less to be so
The thwartings of your dispositions, if
You had not show'd them how ye were disposed
Ere they lack'd power to cross you.
Let them hang.
Ay, and burn too.
Enter MENENIUS and Senators
Come, come, you have been too rough, something
too rough
You must return and mend it.
There's no remedy
Unless, by not so doing, our good city
Cleave in the midst, and perish.
Pray, be counsell'd:
I have a heart as little apt as yours,
But yet a brain that leads my use of anger
To better vantage.
Well said, noble woman?
Before he should thus stoop to the herd, but that
The violent fit o' the time craves it as physic
For the whole state, I would put mine armour on,
Which I can scarcely bear.
What must I do?
Return to the tribunes.
Well, what then? what then?
Repent what you have spoke.
For them! I cannot do it to the gods
Must I then do't to them?
You are too absolute
Though therein you can never be too noble,
But when extremities speak. I have heard you say,
Honour and policy, like unsever'd friends,
I' the war do grow together: grant that, and tell me,
In peace what each of them by the other lose,
That they combine not there.
Tush, tush!
A good demand.
If it be honour in your wars to seem
The same you are not, which, for your best ends,
You adopt your policy, how is it less or worse,
That it shall hold companionship in peace
With honour, as in war, since that to both
It stands in like request?
Why force you this?
Because that now it lies you on to speak
To the people
Nor by the matter which your heart prompts you,
But with such words that are but rooted in
Your tongue, though but bastards and syllables
Of no allowance to your bosom's truth.
Now, this no more dishonours you at all
Than to take in a town with gentle words,
Which else would put you to your fortune and
The hazard of much blood.
I would dissemble with my nature where
My fortunes and my friends at stake required
I should do so in honour: I am in this,
Your wife, your son, these senators, the nobles
And you will rather show our general louts
How you can frown than spend a fawn upon 'em,
For the inheritance of their loves and safeguard
Of what that want might ruin.
Noble lady!
Come, go with us
Not what is dangerous present, but the loss
Of what is past.
I prithee now, my son,
Go to them, with this bonnet in thy hand
And thus far having stretch'd it--here be with them--
Thy knee bussing the stones--for in such business
Action is eloquence, and the eyes of the ignorant
More learned than the ears--waving thy head,
Which often, thus, correcting thy stout heart,
Now humble as the ripest mulberry
That will not hold the handling: or say to them,
Thou art their soldier, and being bred in broils
Hast not the soft way which, thou dost confess,
Were fit for thee to use as they to claim,
In asking their good loves, but thou wilt frame
Thyself, forsooth, hereafter theirs, so far
As thou hast power and person.
This but done,
Even as she speaks, why, their hearts were yours
For they have pardons, being ask'd, as free
As words to little purpose.
Prithee now,
Go, and be ruled: although I know thou hadst rather
Follow thine enemy in a fiery gulf
Than flatter him in a bower. Here is Cominius.
Enter COMINIUS
I have been i' the market-place
You make strong party, or defend yourself
By calmness or by absence: all's in anger.
Only fair speech.
I think 'twill serve, if he
Can thereto frame his spirit.
He must, and will
Prithee now, say you will, and go about it.
Must I go show them my unbarbed sconce?
Must I with base tongue give my noble heart
A lie that it must bear? Well, I will do't:
Yet, were there but this single plot to lose,
This mould of Marcius, they to dust should grind it
And throw't against the wind. To the market-place!
You have put me now to such a part which never
I shall discharge to the life.
Come, come, we'll prompt you.
I prithee now, sweet son, as thou hast said
My praises made thee first a soldier, so,
To have my praise for this, perform a part
Thou hast not done before.
Well, I must do't:
Away, my disposition, and possess me
Some harlot's spirit! my throat of war be turn'd,
Which quired with my drum, into a pipe
Small as an eunuch, or the virgin voice
That babies lulls asleep! the smiles of knaves
Tent in my cheeks, and schoolboys' tears take up
The glasses of my sight! a beggar's tongue
Make motion through my lips, and my arm'd knees,
Who bow'd but in my stirrup, bend like his
That hath received an alms! I will not do't,
Lest I surcease to honour mine own truth
And by my body's action teach my mind
A most inherent baseness.
At thy choice, then:
To beg of thee, it is my more dishonour
Than thou of them. Come all to ruin
Thy mother rather feel thy pride than fear
Thy dangerous stoutness, for I mock at death
With as big heart as thou. Do as thou list
Thy valiantness was mine, thou suck'dst it from me,
But owe thy pride thyself.
Pray, be content:
Mother, I am going to the market-place
Chide me no more. I'll mountebank their loves,
Cog their hearts from them, and come home beloved
Of all the trades in Rome. Look, I am going:
Commend me to my wife. I'll return consul
Or never trust to what my tongue can do
I' the way of flattery further.
Do your will.
Exit
Away! the tribunes do attend you: arm yourself
To answer mildly
With accusations, as I hear, more strong
Than are upon you yet.
The word is 'mildly.' Pray you, let us go:
Let them accuse me by invention, I
Will answer in mine honour.
Ay, but mildly.
Well, mildly be it then. Mildly!
Exeunt
SCENE III. The same. The Forum.
Enter SICINIUS and BRUTUS
In this point charge him home, that he affects
Tyrannical power: if he evade us there,
Enforce him with his envy to the people,
And that the spoil got on the Antiates
Was ne'er distributed.
Enter an AEdile
What, will he come?
He's coming.
How accompanied?
With old Menenius, and those senators
That always favour'd him.
Have you a catalogue
Of all the voices that we have procured
Set down by the poll?
I have
Have you collected them by tribes?
I have.
Assemble presently the people hither
And when they bear me say 'It shall be so
I' the right and strength o' the commons,' be it either
For death, for fine, or banishment, then let them
If I say fine, cry 'Fine
Insisting on the old prerogative
And power i' the truth o' the cause.
I shall inform them.
And when such time they have begun to cry,
Let them not cease, but with a din confused
Enforce the present execution
Of what we chance to sentence.
Very well.
Make them be strong and ready for this hint,
When we shall hap to give 't them.
Go about it.
Exit AEdile
Put him to choler straight: he hath been used
Ever to conquer, and to have his worth
Of contradiction: being once chafed, he cannot
Be rein'd again to temperance
What's in his heart
With us to break his neck.
Well, here he comes.
Enter CORIOLANUS, MENENIUS, and COMINIUS, with Senators and Patricians
Calmly, I do beseech you.
Ay, as an ostler, that for the poorest piece
Will bear the knave by the volume. The honour'd gods
Keep Rome in safety, and the chairs of justice
Supplied with worthy men! plant love among 's!
Throng our large temples with the shows of peace,
And not our streets with war!
Amen, amen.
A noble wish.
Re-enter AEdile, with Citizens
Draw near, ye people.
List to your tribunes. Audience: peace, I say!
First, hear me speak.
Well, say. Peace, ho!
Shall I be charged no further than this present?
Must all determine here?
I do demand,
If you submit you to the people's voices,
Allow their officers and are content
To suffer lawful censure for such faults
As shall be proved upon you?
I am content.
Lo, citizens, he says he is content:
The warlike service he has done, consider
Upon the wounds his body bears, which show
Like graves i' the holy churchyard.
Scratches with briers,
Scars to move laughter only.
Consider further,
That when he speaks not like a citizen,
You find him like a soldier: do not take
His rougher accents for malicious sounds,
But, as I say, such as become a soldier,
Rather than envy you.
Well, well, no more.
What is the matter
That being pass'd for consul with full voice,
I am so dishonour'd that the very hour
You take it off again?
Answer to us.
Say, then: 'tis true, I ought so.
We charge you, that you have contrived to take
From Rome all season'd office and to wind
Yourself into a power tyrannical
For which you are a traitor to the people.
How! traitor!
Nay, temperately
The fires i' the lowest hell fold-in the people!
Call me their traitor! Thou injurious tribune!
Within thine eyes sat twenty thousand deaths,
In thy hand clutch'd as many millions, in
Thy lying tongue both numbers, I would say
'Thou liest' unto thee with a voice as free
As I do pray the gods.
Mark you this, people?
To the rock, to the rock with him!
Peace!
We need not put new matter to his charge:
What you have seen him do and heard him speak,
Beating your officers, cursing yourselves,
Opposing laws with strokes and here defying
Those whose great power must try him
So criminal and in such capital kind,
Deserves the extremest death.
But since he hath
Served well for Rome,--
What do you prate of service?
I talk of that, that know it.
You?
Is this the promise that you made your mother?
Know, I pray you,--
I know no further:
Let them pronounce the steep Tarpeian death,
Vagabond exile, raying, pent to linger
But with a grain a day, I would not buy
Their mercy at the price of one fair word
Nor cheque my courage for what they can give,
To have't with saying 'Good morrow.'
For that he has,
As much as in him lies, from time to time
Envied against the people, seeking means
To pluck away their power, as now at last
Given hostile strokes, and that not in the presence
Of dreaded justice, but on the ministers
That do distribute it
And in the power of us the tribunes, we,
Even from this instant, banish him our city,
In peril of precipitation
From off the rock Tarpeian never more
To enter our Rome gates: i' the people's name,
I say it shall be so.
It shall be so, it shall be so
He's banish'd, and it shall be so.
Hear me, my masters, and my common friends,--
He's sentenced
Let me speak:
I have been consul, and can show for Rome
Her enemies' marks upon me. I do love
My country's good with a respect more tender,
More holy and profound, than mine own life,
My dear wife's estimate, her womb's increase,
And treasure of my loins
Speak that,--
We know your drift: speak what?
There's no more to be said, but he is banish'd,
As enemy to the people and his country:
It shall be so.
It shall be so, it shall be so.
You common cry of curs! whose breath I hate
As reek o' the rotten fens, whose loves I prize
As the dead carcasses of unburied men
That do corrupt my air, I banish you
And here remain with your uncertainty!
Let every feeble rumour shake your hearts!
Your enemies, with nodding of their plumes,
Fan you into despair! Have the power still
To banish your defenders
Your ignorance, which finds not till it feels,
Making not reservation of yourselves,
Still your own foes, deliver you as most
Abated captives to some nation
That won you without blows! Despising,
For you, the city, thus I turn my back:
There is a world elsewhere.
Exeunt CORIOLANUS, COMINIUS, MENENIUS, Senators, and Patricians
The people's enemy is gone, is gone!
Our enemy is banish'd! he is gone! Hoo! hoo!
Shouting, and throwing up their caps
Go, see him out at gates, and follow him,
As he hath followed you, with all despite
Give him deserved vexation. Let a guard
Attend us through the city.
Come, come
The gods preserve our noble tribunes! Come.
Exeunt
ACT IV
SCENE I. Rome. Before a gate of the city.
Enter CORIOLANUS, VOLUMNIA, VIRGILIA, MENENIUS, COMINIUS, with the young Nobility of Rome
Come, leave your tears: a brief farewell: the beast
With many heads butts me away. Nay, mother,
Where is your ancient courage? you were used
To say extremity was the trier of spirits
That common chances common men could bear
That when the sea was calm all boats alike
Show'd mastership in floating
When most struck home, being gentle wounded, craves
A noble cunning: you were used to load me
With precepts that would make invincible
The heart that conn'd them.
O heavens! O heavens!
Nay! prithee, woman,--
Now the red pestilence strike all trades in Rome,
And occupations perish!
What, what, what!
I shall be loved when I am lack'd. Nay, mother.
Resume that spirit, when you were wont to say,
If you had been the wife of Hercules,
Six of his labours you'ld have done, and saved
Your husband so much sweat. Cominius,
Droop not
I'll do well yet. Thou old and true Menenius,
Thy tears are salter than a younger man's,
And venomous to thine eyes. My sometime general,
I have seen thee stem, and thou hast oft beheld
Heart-hardening spectacles
'Tis fond to wail inevitable strokes,
As 'tis to laugh at 'em. My mother, you wot well
My hazards still have been your solace: and
Believe't not lightly--though I go alone,
Like to a lonely dragon, that his fen
Makes fear'd and talk'd of more than seen--your son
Will or exceed the common or be caught
With cautelous baits and practise.
My first son.
Whither wilt thou go? Take good Cominius
With thee awhile: determine on some course,
More than a wild exposture to each chance
That starts i' the way before thee.
O the gods!
I'll follow thee a month, devise with thee
Where thou shalt rest, that thou mayst hear of us
And we of thee: so if the time thrust forth
A cause for thy repeal, we shall not send
O'er the vast world to seek a single man,
And lose advantage, which doth ever cool
I' the absence of the needer.
Fare ye well:
Thou hast years upon thee
Of the wars' surfeits, to go rove with one
That's yet unbruised: bring me but out at gate.
Come, my sweet wife, my dearest mother, and
My friends of noble touch, when I am forth,
Bid me farewell, and smile. I pray you, come.
While I remain above the ground, you shall
Hear from me still, and never of me aught
But what is like me formerly.
That's worthily
As any ear can hear. Come, let's not weep.
If I could shake off but one seven years
From these old arms and legs, by the good gods,
I'ld with thee every foot.
Give me thy hand: Come.
Exeunt
SCENE II. The same. A  street near the gate.
Enter SICINIUS, BRUTUS, and an AEdile
Bid them all home
The nobility are vex'd, whom we see have sided
In his behalf.
Now we have shown our power,
Let us seem humbler after it is done
Than when it was a-doing.
Bid them home:
Say their great enemy is gone, and they
Stand in their ancient strength.
Dismiss them home.
Exit AEdile
Here comes his mother.
Let's not meet her.
Why?
They say she's mad.
They have ta'en note of us: keep on your way.
Enter VOLUMNIA, VIRGILIA, and MENENIUS
O, ye're well met: the hoarded plague o' the gods
Requite your love!
Peace, peace
If that I could for weeping, you should hear,--
Nay, and you shall hear some.
To BRUTUS
Will you be gone?
[To SICINIUS]  You shall stay too: I would I had the power
To say so to my husband.
Are  you mankind?
Ay, fool
Was not a man my father? Hadst thou foxship
To banish him that struck more blows for Rome
Than thou hast spoken words?
O blessed heavens!
More noble blows than ever thou wise words
And for Rome's good. I'll tell thee what
Nay, but thou shalt stay too: I would my son
Were in Arabia, and thy tribe before him,
His good sword in his hand.
What then?
What then!
He'ld make an end of thy posterity.
Bastards and all.
Good man, the wounds that he does bear for Rome!
Come, come, peace.
I would he had continued to his country
As he began, and not unknit himself
The noble knot he made.
I would he had.
'I would he had'! 'Twas you incensed the rabble:
Cats, that can judge as fitly of his worth
As I can of those mysteries which heaven
Will not have earth to know.
Pray, let us go.
Now, pray, sir, get you gone:
You have done a brave deed. Ere you go, hear this:--
As far as doth the Capitol exceed
The meanest house in Rome, so far my son--
This lady's husband here, this, do you see--
Whom you have banish'd, does exceed you all.
Well, well, we'll leave you.
Why stay we to be baited
With one that wants her wits?
Take my prayers with you.
Exeunt Tribunes
I would the gods had nothing else to do
But to confirm my curses! Could I meet 'em
But once a-day, it would unclog my heart
Of what lies heavy to't.
You have told them home
And, by my troth, you have cause. You'll sup with me?
Anger's my meat
And so shall starve with feeding. Come, let's go:
Leave this faint puling and lament as I do,
In anger, Juno-like. Come, come, come.
Fie, fie, fie!
Exeunt
SCENE III. A highway between Rome and Antium.
Enter a Roman and a Volsce, meeting
I know you well, sir, and you know
me: your name, I think, is Adrian.
It is so, sir: truly, I have forgot you.
I am a Roman
as you are, against 'em: know you me yet?
Nicanor? no.
The same, sir.
You had more beard when I last saw you
favour is well approved by your tongue. What's the
news in Rome? I have a note from the Volscian state,
to find you out there: you have well saved me a
day's journey.
There hath been in Rome strange insurrections
people against the senators, patricians, and nobles.
Hath been! is it ended, then? Our state thinks not
so: they are in a most warlike preparation, and
hope to come upon them in the heat of their division.
The main blaze of it is past, but a small thing
would make it flame again: for the nobles receive
so to heart the banishment of that worthy
Coriolanus, that they are in a ripe aptness to take
all power from the people and to pluck from them
their tribunes for ever. This lies glowing, I can
tell you, and is almost mature for the violent
breaking out.
Coriolanus banished!
Banished, sir.
You will be welcome with this intelligence, Nicanor.
The day serves well for them now. I have heard it
said, the fittest time to corrupt a man's wife is
when she's fallen out with her husband. Your noble
Tullus Aufidius will appear well in these wars, his
great opposer, Coriolanus, being now in no request
of his country.
He cannot choose. I am most fortunate, thus
accidentally to encounter you: you have ended my
business, and I will merrily accompany you home.
I shall, between this and supper, tell you most
strange things from Rome
their adversaries. Have you an army ready, say you?
A most royal one
distinctly billeted, already in the entertainment,
and to be on foot at an hour's warning.
I am joyful to hear of their readiness, and am the
man, I think, that shall set them in present action.
So, sir, heartily well met, and most glad of your company.
You take my part from me, sir
to be glad of yours.
Well, let us go together.
Exeunt
SCENE IV. Antium. Before Aufidius's house.
Enter CORIOLANUS in mean apparel, disguised and muffled
A goodly city is this Antium. City,
'Tis I that made thy widows: many an heir
Of these fair edifices 'fore my wars
Have I heard groan and drop: then know me not,
Lest that thy wives with spits and boys with stones
In puny battle slay me.
Enter a Citizen
Save you, sir.
And you.
Direct me, if it be your will,
Where great Aufidius lies: is he in Antium?
He is, and feasts the nobles of the state
At his house this night.
Which is his house, beseech you?
This, here before you.
Thank you, sir: farewell.
Exit Citizen
O world, thy slippery turns! Friends now fast sworn,
Whose double bosoms seem to wear one heart,
Whose house, whose bed, whose meal, and exercise,
Are still together, who twin, as 'twere, in love
Unseparable, shall within this hour,
On a dissension of a doit, break out
To bitterest enmity: so, fellest foes,
Whose passions and whose plots have broke their sleep,
To take the one the other, by some chance,
Some trick not worth an egg, shall grow dear friends
And interjoin their issues. So with me:
My birth-place hate I, and my love's upon
This enemy town. I'll enter: if he slay me,
He does fair justice
I'll do his country service.
Exit
SCENE V. The same. A hall in Aufidius's house.
Music within. Enter a Servingman
Wine, wine, wine! What service
is here! I think our fellows are asleep.
Exit
Enter a second Servingman
Where's Cotus? my master calls
for him. Cotus!
Exit
Enter CORIOLANUS
A goodly house: the feast smells well
Appear not like a guest.
Re-enter the first Servingman
What would you have, friend? whence are you?
Here's no place for you: pray, go to the door.
Exit
I have deserved no better entertainment,
In being Coriolanus.
Re-enter second Servingman
Whence are you, sir? Has the porter his eyes in his
head
Pray, get you out.
Away!
Away! get you away.
Now thou'rt troublesome.
Are you so brave? I'll have you talked with anon.
Enter a third Servingman. The first meets him
What fellow's this?
A strange one as ever I looked on: I cannot get him
out of the house: prithee, call my master to him.
Retires
What have you to do here, fellow? Pray you, avoid
the house.
Let me but stand
What are you?
A gentleman.
A marvellous poor one.
True, so I am.
Pray you, poor gentleman, take up some other
station
Follow your function, go, and batten on cold bits.
Pushes him away
What, you will not? Prithee, tell my master what a
strange guest he has here.
And I shall.
Exit
Where dwellest thou?
Under the canopy.
Under the canopy!
Ay.
Where's that?
I' the city of kites and crows.
I' the city of kites and crows! What an ass it is!
Then thou dwellest with daws too?
No, I serve not thy master.
How, sir! do you meddle with my master?
Ay
mistress. Thou pratest, and pratest
trencher, hence!
Beats him away. Exit third Servingman
Enter AUFIDIUS with the second Servingman
Where is this fellow?
Here, sir: I'ld have beaten him like a dog, but for
disturbing the lords within.
Retires
Whence comest thou? what wouldst thou? thy name?
Why speak'st not? speak, man: what's thy name?
If, Tullus,
Unmuffling
Not yet thou knowest me, and, seeing me, dost not
Think me for the man I am, necessity
Commands me name myself.
What is thy name?
A name unmusical to the Volscians' ears,
And harsh in sound to thine.
Say, what's thy name?
Thou hast a grim appearance, and thy face
Bears a command in't
Thou show'st a noble vessel: what's thy name?
Prepare thy brow to frown: know'st
thou me yet?
I know thee not: thy name?
My name is Caius Marcius, who hath done
To thee particularly and to all the Volsces
Great hurt and mischief
My surname, Coriolanus: the painful service,
The extreme dangers and the drops of blood
Shed for my thankless country are requited
But with that surname
And witness of the malice and displeasure
Which thou shouldst bear me: only that name remains
The cruelty and envy of the people,
Permitted by our dastard nobles, who
Have all forsook me, hath devour'd the rest
And suffer'd me by the voice of slaves to be
Whoop'd out of Rome. Now this extremity
Hath brought me to thy hearth
Mistake me not--to save my life, for if
I had fear'd death, of all the men i' the world
I would have 'voided thee, but in mere spite,
To be full quit of those my banishers,
Stand I before thee here. Then if thou hast
A heart of wreak in thee, that wilt revenge
Thine own particular wrongs and stop those maims
Of shame seen through thy country, speed
thee straight,
And make my misery serve thy turn: so use it
That my revengeful services may prove
As benefits to thee, for I will fight
Against my canker'd country with the spleen
Of all the under fiends. But if so be
Thou darest not this and that to prove more fortunes
Thou'rt tired, then, in a word, I also am
Longer to live most weary, and present
My throat to thee and to thy ancient malice
Which not to cut would show thee but a fool,
Since I have ever follow'd thee with hate,
Drawn tuns of blood out of thy country's breast,
And cannot live but to thy shame, unless
It be to do thee service.
O Marcius, Marcius!
Each word thou hast spoke hath weeded from my heart
A root of ancient envy. If Jupiter
Should from yond cloud speak divine things,
And say 'Tis true,' I'ld not believe them more
Than thee, all noble Marcius. Let me twine
Mine arms about that body, where against
My grained ash an hundred times hath broke
And scarr'd the moon with splinters: here I clip
The anvil of my sword, and do contest
As hotly and as nobly with thy love
As ever in ambitious strength I did
Contend against thy valour. Know thou first,
I loved the maid I married
Sigh'd truer breath
Thou noble thing! more dances my rapt heart
Than when I first my wedded mistress saw
Bestride my threshold. Why, thou Mars! I tell thee,
We have a power on foot
Once more to hew thy target from thy brawn,
Or lose mine arm fort: thou hast beat me out
Twelve several times, and I have nightly since
Dreamt of encounters 'twixt thyself and me
We have been down together in my sleep,
Unbuckling helms, fisting each other's throat,
And waked half dead with nothing. Worthy Marcius,
Had we no quarrel else to Rome, but that
Thou art thence banish'd, we would muster all
From twelve to seventy, and pouring war
Into the bowels of ungrateful Rome,
Like a bold flood o'er-bear. O, come, go in,
And take our friendly senators by the hands
Who now are here, taking their leaves of me,
Who am prepared against your territories,
Though not for Rome itself.
You bless me, gods!
Therefore, most absolute sir, if thou wilt have
The leading of thine own revenges, take
The one half of my commission
As best thou art experienced, since thou know'st
Thy country's strength and weakness,--thine own ways
Whether to knock against the gates of Rome,
Or rudely visit them in parts remote,
To fright them, ere destroy. But come in:
Let me commend thee first to those that shall
Say yea to thy desires. A thousand welcomes!
And more a friend than e'er an enemy
Yet, Marcius, that was much. Your hand: most welcome!
Exeunt CORIOLANUS and AUFIDIUS. The two Servingmen come forward
Here's a strange alteration!
By my hand, I had thought to have strucken him with
a cudgel
false report of him.
What an arm he has! he turned me about with his
finger and his thumb, as one would set up a top.
Nay, I knew by his face that there was something in
him: he had, sir, a kind of face, methought,--I
cannot tell how to term it.
He had so
but I thought there was more in him than I could think.
So did I, I'll be sworn: he is simply the rarest
man i' the world.
I think he is: but a greater soldier than he you wot on.
Who, my master?
Nay, it's no matter for that.
Worth six on him.
Nay, not so neither: but I take him to be the
greater soldier.
Faith, look you, one cannot tell how to say that:
for the defence of a town, our general is excellent.
Ay, and for an assault too.
Re-enter third Servingman
O slaves, I can tell you news,-- news, you rascals!
What, what, what? let's partake.
I would not be a Roman, of all nations
lieve be a condemned man.
Wherefore? wherefore?
Why, here's he that was wont to thwack our general,
Caius Marcius.
Why do you say 'thwack our general '?
I do not say 'thwack our general
good enough for him.
Come, we are fellows and friends: he was ever too
hard for him
He was too hard for him directly, to say the troth
on't: before Corioli he scotched him and notched
him like a carbon ado.
An he had been cannibally given, he might have
broiled and eaten him too.
But, more of thy news?
Why, he is so made on here within, as if he were son
and heir to Mars
question asked him by any of the senators, but they
stand bald before him: our general himself makes a
mistress of him: sanctifies himself with's hand and
turns up the white o' the eye to his discourse. But
the bottom of the news is that our general is cut i'
the middle and but one half of what he was
yesterday
and grant of the whole table. He'll go, he says,
and sowl the porter of Rome gates by the ears: he
will mow all down before him, and leave his passage polled.
And he's as like to do't as any man I can imagine.
Do't! he will do't
many friends as enemies
were, durst not, look you, sir, show themselves, as
we term it, his friends whilst he's in directitude.
Directitude! what's that?
But when they shall see, sir, his crest up again,
and the man in blood, they will out of their
burrows, like conies after rain, and revel all with
him.
But when goes this forward?
To-morrow
drum struck up this afternoon: 'tis, as it were, a
parcel of their feast, and to be executed ere they
wipe their lips.
Why, then we shall have a stirring world again.
This peace is nothing, but to rust iron, increase
tailors, and breed ballad-makers.
Let me have war, say I
day does night
full of vent. Peace is a very apoplexy, lethargy
mulled, deaf, sleepy, insensible
bastard children than war's a destroyer of men.
'Tis so: and as war, in some sort, may be said to
be a ravisher, so it cannot be denied but peace is a
great maker of cuckolds.
Ay, and it makes men hate one another.
Reason
The wars for my money. I hope to see Romans as cheap
as Volscians. They are rising, they are rising.
In, in, in, in!
Exeunt
SCENE VI. Rome. A public place.
Enter SICINIUS and BRUTUS
We hear not of him, neither need we fear him
His remedies are tame i' the present peace
And quietness of the people, which before
Were in wild hurry. Here do we make his friends
Blush that the world goes well, who rather had,
Though they themselves did suffer by't, behold
Dissentious numbers pestering streets than see
Our tradesmen with in their shops and going
About their functions friendly.
We stood to't in good time.
Enter MENENIUS
Is this Menenius?
'Tis he,'tis he: O, he is grown most kind of late.
Hail sir!
Hail to you both!
Your Coriolanus
Is not much miss'd, but with his friends:
The commonwealth doth stand, and so would do,
Were he more angry at it.
All's well
He could have temporized.
Where is he, hear you?
Nay, I hear nothing: his mother and his wife
Hear nothing from him.
Enter three or four Citizens
The gods preserve you both!
God-den, our neighbours.
God-den to you all, god-den to you all.
Ourselves, our wives, and children, on our knees,
Are bound to pray for you both.
Live, and thrive!
Farewell, kind neighbours: we wish'd Coriolanus
Had loved you as we did.
Now the gods keep you!
Farewell, farewell.
Exeunt Citizens
This is a happier and more comely time
Than when these fellows ran about the streets,
Crying confusion.
Caius Marcius was
A worthy officer i' the war
O'ercome with pride, ambitious past all thinking,
Self-loving,--
And affecting one sole throne,
Without assistance.
I think not so.
We should by this, to all our lamentation,
If he had gone forth consul, found it so.
The gods have well prevented it, and Rome
Sits safe and still without him.
Enter an AEdile
Worthy tribunes,
There is a slave, whom we have put in prison,
Reports, the Volsces with two several powers
Are enter'd in the Roman territories,
And with the deepest malice of the war
Destroy what lies before 'em.
'Tis Aufidius,
Who, hearing of our Marcius' banishment,
Thrusts forth his horns again into the world
Which were inshell'd when Marcius stood for Rome,
And durst not once peep out.
Come, what talk you
Of Marcius?
Go see this rumourer whipp'd. It cannot be
The Volsces dare break with us.
Cannot be!
We have record that very well it can,
And three examples of the like have been
Within my age. But reason with the fellow,
Before you punish him, where he heard this,
Lest you shall chance to whip your information
And beat the messenger who bids beware
Of what is to be dreaded.
Tell not me:
I know this cannot be.
Not possible.
Enter a Messenger
The nobles in great earnestness are going
All to the senate-house: some news is come
That turns their countenances.
'Tis this slave
Go whip him, 'fore the people's eyes:--his raising
Nothing but his report.
Yes, worthy sir,
The slave's report is seconded
More fearful, is deliver'd.
What more fearful?
It is spoke freely out of many mouths--
How probable I do not know--that Marcius,
Join'd with Aufidius, leads a power 'gainst Rome,
And vows revenge as spacious as between
The young'st and oldest thing.
This is most likely!
Raised only, that the weaker sort may wish
Good Marcius home again.
The very trick on't.
This is unlikely:
He and Aufidius can no more atone
Than violentest contrariety.
Enter a second Messenger
You are sent for to the senate:
A fearful army, led by Caius Marcius
Associated with Aufidius, rages
Upon our territories
O'erborne their way, consumed with fire, and took
What lay before them.
Enter COMINIUS
O, you have made good work!
What news? what news?
You have holp to ravish your own daughters and
To melt the city leads upon your pates,
To see your wives dishonour'd to your noses,--
What's the news? what's the news?
Your temples burned in their cement, and
Your franchises, whereon you stood, confined
Into an auger's bore.
Pray now, your news?
You have made fair work, I fear me.--Pray, your news?--
If Marcius should be join'd with Volscians,--
If!
He is their god: he leads them like a thing
Made by some other deity than nature,
That shapes man better
Against us brats, with no less confidence
Than boys pursuing summer butterflies,
Or butchers killing flies.
You have made good work,
You and your apron-men
on the voice of occupation and
The breath of garlic-eaters!
He will shake
Your Rome about your ears.
As Hercules
Did shake down mellow fruit.
You have made fair work!
But is this true, sir?
Ay
Before you find it other. All the regions
Do smilingly revolt
Are mock'd for valiant ignorance,
And perish constant fools. Who is't can blame him?
Your enemies and his find something in him.
We are all undone, unless
The noble man have mercy.
Who shall ask it?
The tribunes cannot do't for shame
Deserve such pity of him as the wolf
Does of the shepherds: for his best friends, if they
Should say 'Be good to Rome,' they charged him even
As those should do that had deserved his hate,
And therein show'd like enemies.
'Tis true:
If he were putting to my house the brand
That should consume it, I have not the face
To say 'Beseech you, cease.' You have made fair hands,
You and your crafts! you have crafted fair!
You have brought
A trembling upon Rome, such as was never
So incapable of help.
Say not we brought it.
How! Was it we? we loved him but, like beasts
And cowardly nobles, gave way unto your clusters,
Who did hoot him out o' the city.
But I fear
They'll roar him in again. Tullus Aufidius,
The second name of men, obeys his points
As if he were his officer: desperation
Is all the policy, strength and defence,
That Rome can make against them.
Enter a troop of Citizens
Here come the clusters.
And is Aufidius with him? You are they
That made the air unwholesome, when you cast
Your stinking greasy caps in hooting at
Coriolanus' exile. Now he's coming
And not a hair upon a soldier's head
Which will not prove a whip: as many coxcombs
As you threw caps up will he tumble down,
And pay you for your voices. 'Tis no matter
if he could burn us all into one coal,
We have deserved it.
Faith, we hear fearful news.
For mine own part,
When I said, banish him, I said 'twas pity.
And so did I.
And so did I
many of us: that we did, we did for the best
though we willingly consented to his banishment, yet
it was against our will.
Ye re goodly things, you voices!
You have made
Good work, you and your cry! Shall's to the Capitol?
O, ay, what else?
Exeunt COMINIUS and MENENIUS
Go, masters, get you home
These are a side that would be glad to have
This true which they so seem to fear. Go home,
And show no sign of fear.
The gods be good to us! Come, masters, let's home.
I ever said we were i' the wrong when we banished
him.
So did we all. But, come, let's home.
Exeunt Citizens
I do not like this news.
Nor I.
Let's to the Capitol. Would half my wealth
Would buy this for a lie!
Pray, let us go.
Exeunt
SCENE VII. A camp, at a small distance from Rome.
Enter AUFIDIUS and his Lieutenant
Do they still fly to the Roman?
I do not know what witchcraft's in him, but
Your soldiers use him as the grace 'fore meat,
Their talk at table, and their thanks at end
And you are darken'd in this action, sir,
Even by your own.
I cannot help it now,
Unless, by using means, I lame the foot
Of our design. He bears himself more proudlier,
Even to my person, than I thought he would
When first I did embrace him: yet his nature
In that's no changeling
What cannot be amended.
Yet I wish, sir,--
I mean for your particular,--you had not
Join'd in commission with him
Had borne the action of yourself, or else
To him had left it solely.
I understand thee well
when he shall come to his account, he knows not
What I can urge against him. Although it seems,
And so he thinks, and is no less apparent
To the vulgar eye, that he bears all things fairly.
And shows good husbandry for the Volscian state,
Fights dragon-like, and does achieve as soon
As draw his sword
That which shall break his neck or hazard mine,
Whene'er we come to our account.
Sir, I beseech you, think you he'll carry Rome?
All places yield to him ere he sits down
And the nobility of Rome are his:
The senators and patricians love him too:
The tribunes are no soldiers
Will be as rash in the repeal, as hasty
To expel him thence. I think he'll be to Rome
As is the osprey to the fish, who takes it
By sovereignty of nature. First he was
A noble servant to them
Carry his honours even: whether 'twas pride,
Which out of daily fortune ever taints
The happy man
To fail in the disposing of those chances
Which he was lord of
Not to be other than one thing, not moving
From the casque to the cushion, but commanding peace
Even with the same austerity and garb
As he controll'd the war
As he hath spices of them all, not all,
For I dare so far free him--made him fear'd,
So hated, and so banish'd: but he has a merit,
To choke it in the utterance. So our virtues
Lie in the interpretation of the time:
And power, unto itself most commendable,
Hath not a tomb so evident as a chair
To extol what it hath done.
One fire drives out one fire
Rights by rights falter, strengths by strengths do fail.
Come, let's away. When, Caius, Rome is thine,
Thou art poor'st of all
Exeunt
ACT V
SCENE I. Rome. A public place.
Enter MENENIUS, COMINIUS, SICINIUS, BRUTUS, and others
No, I'll not go: you hear what he hath said
Which was sometime his general
In a most dear particular. He call'd me father:
But what o' that? Go, you that banish'd him
A mile before his tent fall down, and knee
The way into his mercy: nay, if he coy'd
To hear Cominius speak, I'll keep at home.
He would not seem to know me.
Do you hear?
Yet one time he did call me by my name:
I urged our old acquaintance, and the drops
That we have bled together. Coriolanus
He would not answer to: forbad all names
He was a kind of nothing, titleless,
Till he had forged himself a name o' the fire
Of burning Rome.
Why, so: you have made good work!
A pair of tribunes that have rack'd for Rome,
To make coals cheap,--a noble memory!
I minded him how royal 'twas to pardon
When it was less expected: he replied,
It was a bare petition of a state
To one whom they had punish'd.
Very well:
Could he say less?
I offer'd to awaken his regard
For's private friends: his answer to me was,
He could not stay to pick them in a pile
Of noisome musty chaff: he said 'twas folly,
For one poor grain or two, to leave unburnt,
And still to nose the offence.
For one poor grain or two!
I am one of those
And this brave fellow too, we are the grains:
You are the musty chaff
Above the moon: we must be burnt for you.
Nay, pray, be patient: if you refuse your aid
In this so never-needed help, yet do not
Upbraid's with our distress. But, sure, if you
Would be your country's pleader, your good tongue,
More than the instant army we can make,
Might stop our countryman.
No, I'll not meddle.
Pray you, go to him.
What should I do?
Only make trial what your love can do
For Rome, towards Marcius.
Well, and say that Marcius
Return me, as Cominius is return'd,
Unheard
But as a discontented friend, grief-shot
With his unkindness? say't be so?
Yet your good will
must have that thanks from Rome, after the measure
As you intended well.
I'll undertake 't:
I think he'll hear me. Yet, to bite his lip
And hum at good Cominius, much unhearts me.
He was not taken well
The veins unfill'd, our blood is cold, and then
We pout upon the morning, are unapt
To give or to forgive
These and these conveyances of our blood
With wine and feeding, we have suppler souls
Than in our priest-like fasts: therefore I'll watch him
Till he be dieted to my request,
And then I'll set upon him.
You know the very road into his kindness,
And cannot lose your way.
Good faith, I'll prove him,
Speed how it will. I shall ere long have knowledge
Of my success.
Exit
He'll never hear him.
Not?
I tell you, he does sit in gold, his eye
Red as 'twould burn Rome
The gaoler to his pity. I kneel'd before him
'Twas very faintly he said 'Rise
Thus, with his speechless hand: what he would do,
He sent in writing after me
Bound with an oath to yield to his conditions:
So that all hope is vain.
Unless his noble mother, and his wife
Who, as I hear, mean to solicit him
For mercy to his country. Therefore, let's hence,
And with our fair entreaties haste them on.
Exeunt
SCENE II. Entrance of the Volscian camp before Rome.
Two Sentinels on guard.
Enter to them, MENENIUS
Stay: whence are you?
Stand, and go back.
You guard like men
I am an officer of state, and come
To speak with Coriolanus.
From whence?
From Rome.
You may not pass, you must return: our general
Will no more hear from thence.
You'll see your Rome embraced with fire before
You'll speak with Coriolanus.
Good my friends,
If you have heard your general talk of Rome,
And of his friends there, it is lots to blanks,
My name hath touch'd your ears it is Menenius.
Be it so
Is not here passable.
I tell thee, fellow,
The general is my lover: I have been
The book of his good acts, whence men have read
His name unparallel'd, haply amplified
For I have ever verified my friends,
Of whom he's chief, with all the size that verity
Would without lapsing suffer: nay, sometimes,
Like to a bowl upon a subtle ground,
I have tumbled past the throw
Have almost stamp'd the leasing: therefore, fellow,
I must have leave to pass.
Faith, sir, if you had told as many lies in his
behalf as you have uttered words in your own, you
should not pass here
to lie as to live chastely. Therefore, go back.
Prithee, fellow, remember my name is Menenius,
always factionary on the party of your general.
Howsoever you have been his liar, as you say you
have, I am one that, telling true under him, must
say, you cannot pass. Therefore, go back.
Has he dined, canst thou tell? for I would not
speak with him till after dinner.
You are a Roman, are you?
I am, as thy general is.
Then you should hate Rome, as he does. Can you,
when you have pushed out your gates the very
defender of them, and, in a violent popular
ignorance, given your enemy your shield, think to
front his revenges with the easy groans of old
women, the virginal palms of your daughters, or with
the palsied intercession of such a decayed dotant as
you seem to be? Can you think to blow out the
intended fire your city is ready to flame in, with
such weak breath as this? No, you are deceived
therefore, back to Rome, and prepare for your
execution: you are condemned, our general has sworn
you out of reprieve and pardon.
Sirrah, if thy captain knew I were here, he would
use me with estimation.
Come, my captain knows you not.
I mean, thy general.
My general cares not for you. Back, I say, go
I let forth your half-pint of blood
the utmost of your having: back.
Nay, but, fellow, fellow,--
Enter CORIOLANUS and AUFIDIUS
What's the matter?
Now, you companion, I'll say an errand for you:
You shall know now that I am in estimation
perceive that a Jack guardant cannot office me from
my son Coriolanus: guess, but by my entertainment
with him, if thou standest not i' the state of
hanging, or of some death more long in
spectatorship, and crueller in suffering
presently, and swoon for what's to come upon thee.
To CORIOLANUS
The glorious gods sit in hourly synod about thy
particular prosperity, and love thee no worse than
thy old father Menenius does! O my son, my son!
thou art preparing fire for us
water to quench it. I was hardly moved to come to
thee
thee, I have been blown out of your gates with
sighs
petitionary countrymen. The good gods assuage thy
wrath, and turn the dregs of it upon this varlet
here,--this, who, like a block, hath denied my
access to thee.
Away!
How! away!
Wife, mother, child, I know not. My affairs
Are servanted to others: though I owe
My revenge properly, my remission lies
In Volscian breasts. That we have been familiar,
Ingrate forgetfulness shall poison, rather
Than pity note how much. Therefore, be gone.
Mine ears against your suits are stronger than
Your gates against my force. Yet, for I loved thee,
Take this along
Gives a letter
And would have rent it. Another word, Menenius,
I will not hear thee speak. This man, Aufidius,
Was my beloved in Rome: yet thou behold'st!
You keep a constant temper.
Exeunt CORIOLANUS and AUFIDIUS
Now, sir, is your name Menenius?
'Tis a spell, you see, of much  power: you know the
way home again.
Do you hear how we are shent for keeping your
greatness back?
What cause, do you think, I have to swoon?
I neither care for the world nor your general: for
such things as you, I can scarce think there's any,
ye're so slight. He that hath a will to die by
himself fears it not from another: let your general
do his worst. For you, be that you are, long
your misery increase with your age! I say to you,
as I was said to, Away!
Exit
A noble fellow, I warrant him.
The worthy fellow is our general: he's the rock, the
oak not to be wind-shaken.
Exeunt
SCENE III. The tent of Coriolanus.
Enter CORIOLANUS, AUFIDIUS, and others
We will before the walls of Rome tomorrow
Set down our host. My partner in this action,
You must report to the Volscian lords, how plainly
I have borne this business.
Only their ends
You have respected
The general suit of Rome
A private whisper, no, not with such friends
That thought them sure of you.
This last old man,
Whom with a crack'd heart I have sent to Rome,
Loved me above the measure of a father
Nay, godded me, indeed. Their latest refuge
Was to send him
Though I show'd sourly to him, once more offer'd
The first conditions, which they did refuse
And cannot now accept
That thought he could do more, a very little
I have yielded to: fresh embassies and suits,
Nor from the state nor private friends, hereafter
Will I lend ear to. Ha! what shout is this?
Shout within
Shall I be tempted to infringe my vow
In the same time 'tis made? I will not.
Enter in mourning habits, VIRGILIA, VOLUMNIA, leading young MARCIUS, VALERIA, and Attendants
My wife comes foremost
Wherein this trunk was framed, and in her hand
The grandchild to her blood. But, out, affection!
All bond and privilege of nature, break!
Let it be virtuous to be obstinate.
What is that curt'sy worth? or those doves' eyes,
Which can make gods forsworn? I melt, and am not
Of stronger earth than others. My mother bows
As if Olympus to a molehill should
In supplication nod: and my young boy
Hath an aspect of intercession, which
Great nature cries 'Deny not.' let the Volsces
Plough Rome and harrow Italy: I'll never
Be such a gosling to obey instinct, but stand,
As if a man were author of himself
And knew no other kin.
My lord and husband!
These eyes are not the same I wore in Rome.
The sorrow that delivers us thus changed
Makes you think so.
Like a dull actor now,
I have forgot my part, and I am out,
Even to a full disgrace. Best of my flesh,
Forgive my tyranny
For that 'Forgive our Romans.' O, a kiss
Long as my exile, sweet as my revenge!
Now, by the jealous queen of heaven, that kiss
I carried from thee, dear
Hath virgin'd it e'er since. You gods! I prate,
And the most noble mother of the world
Leave unsaluted: sink, my knee, i' the earth
Kneels
Of thy deep duty more impression show
Than that of common sons.
O, stand up blest!
Whilst, with no softer cushion than the flint,
I kneel before thee
Show duty, as mistaken all this while
Between the child and parent.
Kneels
What is this?
Your knees to me? to your corrected son?
Then let the pebbles on the hungry beach
Fillip the stars
Strike the proud cedars 'gainst the fiery sun
Murdering impossibility, to make
What cannot be, slight work.
Thou art my warrior
I holp to frame thee. Do you know this lady?
The noble sister of Publicola,
The moon of Rome, chaste as the icicle
That's curdied by the frost from purest snow
And hangs on Dian's temple: dear Valeria!
This is a poor epitome of yours,
Which by the interpretation of full time
May show like all yourself.
The god of soldiers,
With the consent of supreme Jove, inform
Thy thoughts with nobleness
To shame unvulnerable, and stick i' the wars
Like a great sea-mark, standing every flaw,
And saving those that eye thee!
Your knee, sirrah.
That's my brave boy!
Even he, your wife, this lady, and myself,
Are suitors to you.
I beseech you, peace:
Or, if you'ld ask, remember this before:
The thing I have forsworn to grant may never
Be held by you denials. Do not bid me
Dismiss my soldiers, or capitulate
Again with Rome's mechanics: tell me not
Wherein I seem unnatural: desire not
To ally my rages and revenges with
Your colder reasons.
O, no more, no more!
You have said you will not grant us any thing
For we have nothing else to ask, but that
Which you deny already: yet we will ask
That, if you fail in our request, the blame
May hang upon your hardness: therefore hear us.
Aufidius, and you Volsces, mark
Hear nought from Rome in private. Your request?
Should we be silent and not speak, our raiment
And state of bodies would bewray what life
We have led since thy exile. Think with thyself
How more unfortunate than all living women
Are we come hither: since that thy sight,
which should
Make our eyes flow with joy, hearts dance
with comforts,
Constrains them weep and shake with fear and sorrow
Making the mother, wife and child to see
The son, the husband and the father tearing
His country's bowels out. And to poor we
Thine enmity's most capital: thou barr'st us
Our prayers to the gods, which is a comfort
That all but we enjoy
Alas, how can we for our country pray.
Whereto we are bound, together with thy victory,
Whereto we are bound? alack, or we must lose
The country, our dear nurse, or else thy person,
Our comfort in the country. We must find
An evident calamity, though we had
Our wish, which side should win: for either thou
Must, as a foreign recreant, be led
With manacles thorough our streets, or else
triumphantly tread on thy country's ruin,
And bear the palm for having bravely shed
Thy wife and children's blood. For myself, son,
I purpose not to wait on fortune till
These wars determine: if I cannot persuade thee
Rather to show a noble grace to both parts
Than seek the end of one, thou shalt no sooner
March to assault thy country than to tread--
Trust to't, thou shalt not--on thy mother's womb,
That brought thee to this world.
Ay, and mine,
That brought you forth this boy, to keep your name
Living to time.
A' shall not tread on me
I'll run away till I am bigger, but then I'll fight.
Not of a woman's tenderness to be,
Requires nor child nor woman's face to see.
I have sat too long.
Rising
Nay, go not from us thus.
If it were so that our request did tend
To save the Romans, thereby to destroy
The Volsces whom you serve, you might condemn us,
As poisonous of your honour: no
Is that you reconcile them: while the Volsces
May say 'This mercy we have show'd
'This we received
Give the all-hail to thee and cry 'Be blest
For making up this peace!' Thou know'st, great son,
The end of war's uncertain, but this certain,
That, if thou conquer Rome, the benefit
Which thou shalt thereby reap is such a name,
Whose repetition will be dogg'd with curses
Whose chronicle thus writ: 'The man was noble,
But with his last attempt he wiped it out
Destroy'd his country, and his name remains
To the ensuing age abhorr'd.' Speak to me, son:
Thou hast affected the fine strains of honour,
To imitate the graces of the gods
To tear with thunder the wide cheeks o' the air,
And yet to charge thy sulphur with a bolt
That should but rive an oak. Why dost not speak?
Think'st thou it honourable for a noble man
Still to remember wrongs? Daughter, speak you:
He cares not for your weeping. Speak thou, boy:
Perhaps thy childishness will move him more
Than can our reasons. There's no man in the world
More bound to 's mother
Like one i' the stocks. Thou hast never in thy life
Show'd thy dear mother any courtesy,
When she, poor hen, fond of no second brood,
Has cluck'd thee to the wars and safely home,
Loaden with honour. Say my request's unjust,
And spurn me back: but if it be not so,
Thou art not honest
That thou restrain'st from me the duty which
To a mother's part belongs. He turns away:
Down, ladies
To his surname Coriolanus 'longs more pride
Than pity to our prayers. Down: an end
This is the last: so we will home to Rome,
And die among our neighbours. Nay, behold 's:
This boy, that cannot tell what he would have
But kneels and holds up bands for fellowship,
Does reason our petition with more strength
Than thou hast to deny 't. Come, let us go:
This fellow had a Volscian to his mother
His wife is in Corioli and his child
Like him by chance. Yet give us our dispatch:
I am hush'd until our city be a-fire,
And then I'll speak a little.
He holds her by the hand, silent
O mother, mother!
What have you done? Behold, the heavens do ope,
The gods look down, and this unnatural scene
They laugh at. O my mother, mother! O!
You have won a happy victory to Rome
But, for your son,--believe it, O, believe it,
Most dangerously you have with him prevail'd,
If not most mortal to him. But, let it come.
Aufidius, though I cannot make true wars,
I'll frame convenient peace. Now, good Aufidius,
Were you in my stead, would you have heard
A mother less? or granted less, Aufidius?
I was moved withal.
I dare be sworn you were:
And, sir, it is no little thing to make
Mine eyes to sweat compassion. But, good sir,
What peace you'll make, advise me: for my part,
I'll not to Rome, I'll back with you
Stand to me in this cause. O mother! wife!
[Aside]  I am glad thou hast set thy mercy and
thy honour
At difference in thee: out of that I'll work
Myself a former fortune.
The Ladies make signs to CORIOLANUS
Ay, by and by
To VOLUMNIA, VIRGILIA,  and c
But we will drink together
A better witness back than words, which we,
On like conditions, will have counter-seal'd.
Come, enter with us. Ladies, you deserve
To have a temple built you: all the swords
In Italy, and her confederate arms,
Could not have made this peace.
Exeunt
SCENE IV. Rome. A public place.
Enter MENENIUS and SICINIUS
See you yond coign o' the Capitol, yond
corner-stone?
Why, what of that?
If it be possible for you to displace it with your
little finger, there is some hope the ladies of
Rome, especially his mother, may prevail with him.
But I say there is no hope in't: our throats are
sentenced and stay upon execution.
Is't possible that so short a time can alter the
condition of a man!
There is differency between a grub and a butterfly
yet your butterfly was a grub. This Marcius is grown
from man to dragon: he has wings
creeping thing.
He loved his mother dearly.
So did he me: and he no more remembers his mother
now than an eight-year-old horse. The tartness
of his face sours ripe grapes: when he walks, he
moves like an engine, and the ground shrinks before
his treading: he is able to pierce a corslet with
his eye
battery. He sits in his state, as a thing made for
Alexander. What he bids be done is finished with
his bidding. He wants nothing of a god but eternity
and a heaven to throne in.
Yes, mercy, if you report him truly.
I paint him in the character. Mark what mercy his
mother shall bring from him: there is no more mercy
in him than there is milk in a male tiger
shall our poor city find: and all this is long of
you.
The gods be good unto us!
No, in such a case the gods will not be good unto
us. When we banished him, we respected not them
and, he returning to break our necks, they respect not us.
Enter a Messenger
Sir, if you'ld save your life, fly to your house:
The plebeians have got your fellow-tribune
And hale him up and down, all swearing, if
The Roman ladies bring not comfort home,
They'll give him death by inches.
Enter a second Messenger
What's the news?
Good news, good news
The Volscians are dislodged, and Marcius gone:
A merrier day did never yet greet Rome,
No, not the expulsion of the Tarquins.
Friend,
Art thou certain this is true? is it most certain?
As certain as I know the sun is fire:
Where have you lurk'd, that you make doubt of it?
Ne'er through an arch so hurried the blown tide,
As the recomforted through the gates. Why, hark you!
Trumpets
The trumpets, sackbuts, psalteries and fifes,
Tabours and cymbals and the shouting Romans,
Make the sun dance. Hark you!
A shout within
This is good news:
I will go meet the ladies. This Volumnia
Is worth of consuls, senators, patricians,
A city full
A sea and land full. You have pray'd well to-day:
This morning for ten thousand of your throats
I'd not have given a doit. Hark, how they joy!
Music still, with shouts
First, the gods bless you for your tidings
Accept my thankfulness.
Sir, we have all
Great cause to give great thanks.
They are near the city?
Almost at point to enter.
We will meet them,
And help the joy.
Exeunt
SCENE V. The same. A street near the gate.
Enter two Senators with VOLUMNIA, VIRGILIA,  VALERIA,  and c. passing over the stage, followed by Patricians and others
Behold our patroness, the life of Rome!
Call all your tribes together, praise the gods,
And make triumphant fires
Unshout the noise that banish'd Marcius,
Repeal him with the welcome of his mother
Cry 'Welcome, ladies, welcome!'
Welcome, ladies, Welcome!
A flourish with drums and trumpets. Exeunt
SCENE VI. Antium. A public place.
Enter TULLUS AUFIDIUS, with Attendants
Go tell the lords o' the city I am here:
Deliver them this paper: having read it,
Bid them repair to the market place
Even in theirs and in the commons' ears,
Will vouch the truth of it. Him I accuse
The city ports by this hath enter'd and
Intends to appear before the people, hoping
To purge herself with words: dispatch.
Exeunt Attendants
Enter three or four Conspirators of AUFIDIUS' faction
Most welcome!
How is it with our general?
Even so
As with a man by his own alms empoison'd,
And with his charity slain.
Most noble sir,
If you do hold the same intent wherein
You wish'd us parties, we'll deliver you
Of your great danger.
Sir, I cannot tell:
We must proceed as we do find the people.
The people will remain uncertain whilst
'Twixt you there's difference
Makes the survivor heir of all.
I know it
And my pretext to strike at him admits
A good construction. I raised him, and I pawn'd
Mine honour for his truth: who being so heighten'd,
He water'd his new plants with dews of flattery,
Seducing so my friends
He bow'd his nature, never known before
But to be rough, unswayable and free.
Sir, his stoutness
When he did stand for consul, which he lost
By lack of stooping,--
That I would have spoke of:
Being banish'd for't, he came unto my hearth
Presented to my knife his throat: I took him
Made him joint-servant with me
In all his own desires
Out of my files, his projects to accomplish,
My best and freshest men
In mine own person
Which he did end all his
To do myself this wrong: till, at the last,
I seem'd his follower, not partner, and
He waged me with his countenance, as if
I had been mercenary.
So he did, my lord:
The army marvell'd at it, and, in the last,
When he had carried Rome and that we look'd
For no less spoil than glory,--
There was it:
For which my sinews shall be stretch'd upon him.
At a few drops of women's rheum, which are
As cheap as lies, he sold the blood and labour
Of our great action: therefore shall he die,
And I'll renew me in his fall. But, hark!
Drums and trumpets sound, with great shouts of the People
Your native town you enter'd like a post,
And had no welcomes home: but he returns,
Splitting the air with noise.
And patient fools,
Whose children he hath slain, their base throats tear
With giving him glory.
Therefore, at your vantage,
Ere he express himself, or move the people
With what he would say, let him feel your sword,
Which we will second. When he lies along,
After your way his tale pronounced shall bury
His reasons with his body.
Say no more:
Here come the lords.
Enter the Lords of the city
You are most welcome home.
I have not deserved it.
But, worthy lords, have you with heed perused
What I have written to you?
We have.
And grieve to hear't.
What faults he made before the last, I think
Might have found easy fines: but there to end
Where he was to begin and give away
The benefit of our levies, answering us
With our own charge, making a treaty where
There was a yielding,--this admits no excuse.
He approaches: you shall hear him.
Enter CORIOLANUS, marching with drum and colours
Hail, lords! I am return'd your soldier,
No more infected with my country's love
Than when I parted hence, but still subsisting
Under your great command. You are to know
That prosperously I have attempted and
With bloody passage led your wars even to
The gates of Rome. Our spoils we have brought home
Do more than counterpoise a full third part
The charges of the action. We have made peace
With no less honour to the Antiates
Than shame to the Romans: and we here deliver,
Subscribed by the consuls and patricians,
Together with the seal o' the senate, what
We have compounded on.
Read it not, noble lords
But tell the traitor, in the high'st degree
He hath abused your powers.
Traitor! how now!
Ay, traitor, Marcius!
Marcius!
Ay, Marcius, Caius Marcius: dost thou think
I'll grace thee with that robbery, thy stol'n name
Coriolanus in Corioli?
You lords and heads o' the state, perfidiously
He has betray'd your business, and given up,
For certain drops of salt, your city Rome,
I say 'your city,' to his wife and mother
Breaking his oath and resolution like
A twist of rotten silk, never admitting
Counsel o' the war, but at his nurse's tears
He whined and roar'd away your victory,
That pages blush'd at him and men of heart
Look'd wondering each at other.
Hear'st thou, Mars?
Name not the god, thou boy of tears!
Ha!
No more.
Measureless liar, thou hast made my heart
Too great for what contains it. Boy! O slave!
Pardon me, lords, 'tis the first time that ever
I was forced to scold. Your judgments, my grave lords,
Must give this cur the lie: and his own notion--
Who wears my stripes impress'd upon him
Must bear my beating to his grave--shall join
To thrust the lie unto him.
Peace, both, and hear me speak.
Cut me to pieces, Volsces
Stain all your edges on me. Boy! false hound!
If you have writ your annals true, 'tis there,
That, like an eagle in a dove-cote, I
Flutter'd your Volscians in Corioli:
Alone I did it. Boy!
Why, noble lords,
Will you be put in mind of his blind fortune,
Which was your shame, by this unholy braggart,
'Fore your own eyes and ears?
Let him die for't.
'Tear him to pieces.' 'Do it presently.' 'He kill'd
my son.' 'My daughter.' 'He killed my cousin
Marcus.' 'He killed my father.'
Peace, ho! no outrage: peace!
The man is noble and his fame folds-in
This orb o' the earth. His last offences to us
Shall have judicious hearing. Stand, Aufidius,
And trouble not the peace.
O that I had him,
With six Aufidiuses, or more, his tribe,
To use my lawful sword!
Insolent villain!
Kill, kill, kill, kill, kill him!
The Conspirators draw, and kill CORIOLANUS: AUFIDIUS stands on his body
Hold, hold, hold, hold!
My noble masters, hear me speak.
O Tullus,--
Thou hast done a deed whereat valour will weep.
Tread not upon him. Masters all, be quiet
Put up your swords.
My lords, when you shall know--as in this rage,
Provoked by him, you cannot--the great danger
Which this man's life did owe you, you'll rejoice
That he is thus cut off. Please it your honours
To call me to your senate, I'll deliver
Myself your loyal servant, or endure
Your heaviest censure.
Bear from hence his body
And mourn you for him: let him be regarded
As the most noble corse that ever herald
Did follow to his urn.
His own impatience
Takes from Aufidius a great part of blame.
Let's make the best of it.
My rage is gone
And I am struck with sorrow. Take him up.
Help, three o' the chiefest soldiers
Beat thou the drum, that it speak mournfully:
Trail your steel pikes. Though in this city he
Hath widow'd and unchilded many a one,
Which to this hour bewail the injury,
Yet he shall have a noble memory. Assist.
Exeunt, bearing the body of CORIOLANUS. A dead march sounded
ACT I
SCENE I. Britain. The garden of Cymbeline's palace.
Enter two Gentlemen
You do not meet a man but frowns: our bloods
No more obey the heavens than our courtiers
Still seem as does the king.
But what's the matter?
His daughter, and the heir of's kingdom, whom
He purposed to his wife's sole son--a widow
That late he married--hath referr'd herself
Unto a poor but worthy gentleman: she's wedded
Her husband banish'd
Is outward sorrow
Be touch'd at very heart.
None but the king?
He that hath lost her too
That most desired the match
Although they wear their faces to the bent
Of the king's look's, hath a heart that is not
Glad at the thing they scowl at.
And why so?
He that hath miss'd the princess is a thing
Too bad for bad report: and he that hath her--
I mean, that married her, alack, good man!
And therefore banish'd--is a creature such
As, to seek through the regions of the earth
For one his like, there would be something failing
In him that should compare. I do not think
So fair an outward and such stuff within
Endows a man but he.
You speak him far.
I do extend him, sir, within himself,
Crush him together rather than unfold
His measure duly.
What's his name and birth?
I cannot delve him to the root: his father
Was call'd Sicilius, who did join his honour
Against the Romans with Cassibelan,
But had his titles by Tenantius whom
He served with glory and admired success,
So gain'd the sur-addition Leonatus
And had, besides this gentleman in question,
Two other sons, who in the wars o' the time
Died with their swords in hand
their father,
Then old and fond of issue, took such sorrow
That he quit being, and his gentle lady,
Big of this gentleman our theme, deceased
As he was born. The king he takes the babe
To his protection, calls him Posthumus Leonatus,
Breeds him and makes him of his bed-chamber,
Puts to him all the learnings that his time
Could make him the receiver of
As we do air, fast as 'twas minister'd,
And in's spring became a harvest, lived in court--
Which rare it is to do--most praised, most loved,
A sample to the youngest, to the more mature
A glass that feated them, and to the graver
A child that guided dotards
For whom he now is banish'd, her own price
Proclaims how she esteem'd him and his virtue
By her election may be truly read
What kind of man he is.
I honour him
Even out of your report. But, pray you, tell me,
Is she sole child to the king?
His only child.
He had two sons: if this be worth your hearing,
Mark it: the eldest of them at three years old,
I' the swathing-clothes the other, from their nursery
Were stol'n, and to this hour no guess in knowledge
Which way they went.
How long is this ago?
Some twenty years.
That a king's children should be so convey'd,
So slackly guarded, and the search so slow,
That could not trace them!
Howsoe'er 'tis strange,
Or that the negligence may well be laugh'd at,
Yet is it true, sir.
I do well believe you.
We must forbear: here comes the gentleman,
The queen, and princess.
Exeunt
Enter the QUEEN, POSTHUMUS LEONATUS, and IMOGEN
No, be assured you shall not find me, daughter,
After the slander of most stepmothers,
Evil-eyed unto you: you're my prisoner, but
Your gaoler shall deliver you the keys
That lock up your restraint. For you, Posthumus,
So soon as I can win the offended king,
I will be known your advocate: marry, yet
The fire of rage is in him, and 'twere good
You lean'd unto his sentence with what patience
Your wisdom may inform you.
Please your highness,
I will from hence to-day.
You know the peril.
I'll fetch a turn about the garden, pitying
The pangs of barr'd affections, though the king
Hath charged you should not speak together.
Exit
O
Dissembling courtesy! How fine this tyrant
Can tickle where she wounds! My dearest husband,
I something fear my father's wrath
Always reserved my holy duty--what
His rage can do on me: you must be gone
And I shall here abide the hourly shot
Of angry eyes, not comforted to live,
But that there is this jewel in the world
That I may see again.
My queen! my mistress!
O lady, weep no more, lest I give cause
To be suspected of more tenderness
Than doth become a man. I will remain
The loyal'st husband that did e'er plight troth:
My residence in Rome at one Philario's,
Who to my father was a friend, to me
Known but by letter: thither write, my queen,
And with mine eyes I'll drink the words you send,
Though ink be made of gall.
Re-enter QUEEN
Be brief, I pray you:
If the king come, I shall incur I know not
How much of his displeasure.
Aside
Yet I'll move him
To walk this way: I never do him wrong,
But he does buy my injuries, to be friends
Pays dear for my offences.
Exit
Should we be taking leave
As long a term as yet we have to live,
The loathness to depart would grow. Adieu!
Nay, stay a little:
Were you but riding forth to air yourself,
Such parting were too petty. Look here, love
This diamond was my mother's: take it, heart
But keep it till you woo another wife,
When Imogen is dead.
How, how! another?
You gentle gods, give me but this I have,
And sear up my embracements from a next
With bonds of death!
Putting on the ring
Remain, remain thou here
While sense can keep it on. And, sweetest, fairest,
As I my poor self did exchange for you,
To your so infinite loss, so in our trifles
I still win of you: for my sake wear this
It is a manacle of love
Upon this fairest prisoner.
Putting a bracelet upon her arm
O the gods!
When shall we see again?
Enter CYMBELINE and Lords
Alack, the king!
Thou basest thing, avoid! hence, from my sight!
If after this command thou fraught the court
With thy unworthiness, thou diest: away!
Thou'rt poison to my blood.
The gods protect you!
And bless the good remainders of the court! I am gone.
Exit
There cannot be a pinch in death
More sharp than this is.
O disloyal thing,
That shouldst repair my youth, thou heap'st
A year's age on me.
I beseech you, sir,
Harm not yourself with your vexation
I am senseless of your wrath
Subdues all pangs, all fears.
Past grace? obedience?
Past hope, and in despair
That mightst have had the sole son of my queen!
O blest, that I might not! I chose an eagle,
And did avoid a puttock.
Thou took'st a beggar
A seat for baseness.
No
A lustre to it.
O thou vile one!
Sir,
It is your fault that I have loved Posthumus:
You bred him as my playfellow, and he is
A man worth any woman, overbuys me
Almost the sum he pays.
What, art thou mad?
Almost, sir: heaven restore me! Would I were
A neat-herd's daughter, and my Leonatus
Our neighbour shepherd's son!
Thou foolish thing!
Re-enter QUEEN
They were again together: you have done
Not after our command. Away with her,
And pen her up.
Beseech your patience. Peace,
Dear lady daughter, peace! Sweet sovereign,
Leave us to ourselves
Out of your best advice.
Nay, let her languish
A drop of blood a day
Die of this folly!
Exeunt CYMBELINE and Lords
Fie! you must give way.
Enter PISANIO
Here is your servant. How now, sir! What news?
My lord your son drew on my master.
Ha!
No harm, I trust, is done?
There might have been,
But that my master rather play'd than fought
And had no help of anger: they were parted
By gentlemen at hand.
I am very glad on't.
Your son's my father's friend
To draw upon an exile! O brave sir!
I would they were in Afric both together
Myself by with a needle, that I might prick
The goer-back. Why came you from your master?
On his command: he would not suffer me
To bring him to the haven
Of what commands I should be subject to,
When 't pleased you to employ me.
This hath been
Your faithful servant: I dare lay mine honour
He will remain so.
I humbly thank your highness.
Pray, walk awhile.
About some half-hour hence,
I pray you, speak with me: you shall at least
Go see my lord aboard: for this time leave me.
Exeunt
SCENE II. The same. A public place.
Enter CLOTEN and two Lords
Sir, I would advise you to shift a shirt
violence of action hath made you reek as a
sacrifice: where air comes out, air comes in:
there's none abroad so wholesome as that you vent.
If my shirt were bloody, then to shift it. Have I hurt him?
[Aside]  No, 'faith
Hurt him! his body's a passable carcass, if he be
not hurt: it is a thoroughfare for steel, if it be not hurt.
[Aside]  His steel was in debt
backside the town.
The villain would not stand me.
[Aside]  No
Stand you! You have land enough of your own: but
he added to your having
[Aside]  As many inches as you have oceans. Puppies!
I would they had not come between us.
[Aside]  So would I, till you had measured how long
a fool you were upon the ground.
And that she should love this fellow and refuse me!
[Aside]  If it be a sin to make a true election, she
is damned.
Sir, as I told you always, her beauty and her brain
go not together: she's a good sign, but I have seen
small reflection of her wit.
[Aside]  She shines not upon fools, lest the
reflection should hurt her.
Come, I'll to my chamber. Would there had been some
hurt done!
[Aside]  I wish not so
of an ass, which is no great hurt.
You'll go with us?
I'll attend your lordship.
Nay, come, let's go together.
Well, my lord.
Exeunt
SCENE III. A room in Cymbeline's palace.
Enter IMOGEN and PISANIO
I would thou grew'st unto the shores o' the haven,
And question'dst every sail: if he should write
And not have it, 'twere a paper lost,
As offer'd mercy is. What was the last
That he spake to thee?
It was his queen, his queen!
Then waved his handkerchief?
And kiss'd it, madam.
Senseless Linen! happier therein than I!
And that was all?
No, madam
As he could make me with this eye or ear
Distinguish him from others, he did keep
The deck, with glove, or hat, or handkerchief,
Still waving, as the fits and stirs of 's mind
Could best express how slow his soul sail'd on,
How swift his ship.
Thou shouldst have made him
As little as a crow, or less, ere left
To after-eye him.
Madam, so I did.
I would have broke mine eye-strings
To look upon him, till the diminution
Of space had pointed him sharp as my needle,
Nay, follow'd him, till he had melted from
The smallness of a gnat to air, and then
Have turn'd mine eye and wept. But, good Pisanio,
When shall we hear from him?
Be assured, madam,
With his next vantage.
I did not take my leave of him, but had
Most pretty things to say: ere I could tell him
How I would think on him at certain hours
Such thoughts and such, or I could make him swear
The shes of Italy should not betray
Mine interest and his honour, or have charged him,
At the sixth hour of morn, at noon, at midnight,
To encounter me with orisons, for then
I am in heaven for him
Give him that parting kiss which I had set
Betwixt two charming words, comes in my father
And like the tyrannous breathing of the north
Shakes all our buds from growing.
Enter a Lady
The queen, madam,
Desires your highness' company.
Those things I bid you do, get them dispatch'd.
I will attend the queen.
Madam, I shall.
Exeunt
SCENE IV. Rome. Philario's house.
Enter PHILARIO, IACHIMO, a Frenchman, a Dutchman, and a Spaniard
Believe it, sir, I have seen him in Britain: he was
then of a crescent note, expected to prove so worthy
as since he hath been allowed the name of
could then have looked on him without the help of
admiration, though the catalogue of his endowments
had been tabled by his side and I to peruse him by items.
You speak of him when he was less furnished than now
he is with that which makes him both without and within.
I have seen him in France: we had very many there
could behold the sun with as firm eyes as he.
This matter of marrying his king's daughter, wherein
he must be weighed rather by her value than his own,
words him, I doubt not, a great deal from the matter.
And then his banishment.
Ay, and the approbation of those that weep this
lamentable divorce under her colours are wonderfully
to extend him
which else an easy battery might lay flat, for
taking a beggar without less quality. But how comes
it he is to sojourn with you? How creeps
acquaintance?
His father and I were soldiers together
have been often bound for no less than my life.
Here comes the Briton: let him be so entertained
amongst you as suits, with gentlemen of your
knowing, to a stranger of his quality.
Enter POSTHUMUS LEONATUS
I beseech you all, be better known to this
gentleman
of mine: how worthy he is I will leave to appear
hereafter, rather than story him in his own hearing.
Sir, we have known together in Orleans.
Since when I have been debtor to you for courtesies,
which I will be ever to pay and yet pay still.
Sir, you o'er-rate my poor kindness: I was glad I
did atone my countryman and you
you should have been put together with so mortal a
purpose as then each bore, upon importance of so
slight and trivial a nature.
By your pardon, sir, I was then a young traveller
rather shunned to go even with what I heard than in
my every action to be guided by others' experiences:
but upon my mended judgment--if I offend not to say
it is mended--my quarrel was not altogether slight.
'Faith, yes, to be put to the arbitrement of swords,
and by such two that would by all likelihood have
confounded one the other, or have fallen both.
Can we, with manners, ask what was the difference?
Safely, I think: 'twas a contention in public,
which may, without contradiction, suffer the report.
It was much like an argument that fell out last
night, where each of us fell in praise of our
country mistresses
vouching--and upon warrant of bloody
affirmation--his to be more fair, virtuous, wise,
chaste, constant-qualified and less attemptable
than any the rarest of our ladies in France.
That lady is not now living, or this gentleman's
opinion by this worn out.
She holds her virtue still and I my mind.
You must not so far prefer her 'fore ours of Italy.
Being so far provoked as I was in France, I would
abate her nothing, though I profess myself her
adorer, not her friend.
As fair and as good--a kind of hand-in-hand
comparison--had been something too fair and too good
for any lady in Britain. If she went before others
I have seen, as that diamond of yours outlustres
many I have beheld. I could not but believe she
excelled many: but I have not seen the most
precious diamond that is, nor you the lady.
I praised her as I rated her: so do I my stone.
What do you esteem it at?
More than the world enjoys.
Either your unparagoned mistress is dead, or she's
outprized by a trifle.
You are mistaken: the one may be sold, or given, if
there were wealth enough for the purchase, or merit
for the gift: the other is not a thing for sale,
and only the gift of the gods.
Which the gods have given you?
Which, by their graces, I will keep.
You may wear her in title yours: but, you know,
strange fowl light upon neighbouring ponds. Your
ring may be stolen too: so your brace of unprizable
estimations
casual
courtier, would hazard the winning both of first and last.
Your Italy contains none so accomplished a courtier
to convince the honour of my mistress, if, in the
holding or loss of that, you term her frail. I do
nothing doubt you have store of thieves
notwithstanding, I fear not my ring.
Let us leave here, gentlemen.
Sir, with all my heart. This worthy signior, I
thank him, makes no stranger of me
With five times so much conversation, I should get
ground of your fair mistress, make her go back, even
to the yielding, had I admittance and opportunity to friend.
No, no.
I dare thereupon pawn the moiety of my estate to
your ring
something: but I make my wager rather against your
confidence than her reputation: and, to bar your
offence herein too, I durst attempt it against any
lady in the world.
You are a great deal abused in too bold a
persuasion
worthy of by your attempt.
What's that?
A repulse: though your attempt, as you call it,
deserve more
Gentlemen, enough of this: it came in too suddenly
let it die as it was born, and, I pray you, be
better acquainted.
Would I had put my estate and my neighbour's on the
approbation of what I have spoke!
What lady would you choose to assail?
Yours
I will lay you ten thousand ducats to your ring,
that, commend me to the court where your lady is,
with no more advantage than the opportunity of a
second conference, and I will bring from thence
that honour of hers which you imagine so reserved.
I will wage against your gold, gold to it: my ring
I hold dear as my finger
You are afraid, and therein the wiser. If you buy
ladies' flesh at a million a dram, you cannot
preserve it from tainting: but I see you have some
religion in you, that you fear.
This is but a custom in your tongue
graver purpose, I hope.
I am the master of my speeches, and would undergo
what's spoken, I swear.
Will you? I shall but lend my diamond till your
return: let there be covenants drawn between's: my
mistress exceeds in goodness the hugeness of your
unworthy thinking: I dare you to this match: here's my ring.
I will have it no lay.
By the gods, it is one. If I bring you no
sufficient testimony that I have enjoyed the dearest
bodily part of your mistress, my ten thousand ducats
are yours
and leave her in such honour as you have trust in,
she your jewel, this your jewel, and my gold are
yours: provided I have your commendation for my more
free entertainment.
I embrace these conditions
betwixt us. Only, thus far you shall answer: if
you make your voyage upon her and give me directly
to understand you have prevailed, I am no further
your enemy
remain unseduced, you not making it appear
otherwise, for your ill opinion and the assault you
have made to her chastity you shall answer me with
your sword.
Your hand
down by lawful counsel, and straight away for
Britain, lest the bargain should catch cold and
starve: I will fetch my gold and have our two
wagers recorded.
Agreed.
Exeunt POSTHUMUS LEONATUS and IACHIMO
Will this hold, think you?
Signior Iachimo will not from it.
Pray, let us follow 'em.
Exeunt
SCENE V. Britain. A room in Cymbeline's palace.
Enter QUEEN, Ladies, and CORNELIUS
Whiles yet the dew's on ground, gather those flowers
Make haste: who has the note of them?
I, madam.
Dispatch.
Exeunt Ladies
Now, master doctor, have you brought those drugs?
Pleaseth your highness, ay: here they are, madam:
Presenting a small box
But I beseech your grace, without offence,--
My conscience bids me ask--wherefore you have
Commanded of me those most poisonous compounds,
Which are the movers of a languishing death
But though slow, deadly?
I wonder, doctor,
Thou ask'st me such a question. Have I not been
Thy pupil long? Hast thou not learn'd me how
To make perfumes? distil? preserve? yea, so
That our great king himself doth woo me oft
For my confections? Having thus far proceeded,--
Unless thou think'st me devilish--is't not meet
That I did amplify my judgment in
Other conclusions? I will try the forces
Of these thy compounds on such creatures as
We count not worth the hanging, but none human,
To try the vigour of them and apply
Allayments to their act, and by them gather
Their several virtues and effects.
Your highness
Shall from this practise but make hard your heart:
Besides, the seeing these effects will be
Both noisome and infectious.
O, content thee.
Enter PISANIO
Aside
Here comes a flattering rascal
Will I first work: he's for his master,
An enemy to my son. How now, Pisanio!
Doctor, your service for this time is ended
Take your own way.
[Aside]          I do suspect you, madam
But you shall do no harm.
[To PISANIO]            Hark thee, a word.
[Aside]  I do not like her. She doth think she has
Strange lingering poisons: I do know her spirit,
And will not trust one of her malice with
A drug of such damn'd nature. Those she has
Will stupefy and dull the sense awhile
Which first, perchance, she'll prove on
cats and dogs,
Then afterward up higher: but there is
No danger in what show of death it makes,
More than the locking-up the spirits a time,
To be more fresh, reviving. She is fool'd
With a most false effect
So to be false with her.
No further service, doctor,
Until I send for thee.
I humbly take my leave.
Exit
Weeps she still, say'st thou? Dost thou think in time
She will not quench and let instructions enter
Where folly now possesses? Do thou work:
When thou shalt bring me word she loves my son,
I'll tell thee on the instant thou art then
As great as is thy master, greater, for
His fortunes all lie speechless and his name
Is at last gasp: return he cannot, nor
Continue where he is: to shift his being
Is to exchange one misery with another,
And every day that comes comes to decay
A day's work in him. What shalt thou expect,
To be depender on a thing that leans,
Who cannot be new built, nor has no friends,
So much as but to prop him?
The QUEEN drops the box: PISANIO takes it up
Thou takest up
Thou know'st not what
It is a thing I made, which hath the king
Five times redeem'd from death: I do not know
What is more cordial. Nay, I prethee, take it
It is an earnest of a further good
That I mean to thee. Tell thy mistress how
The case stands with her
Think what a chance thou changest on, but think
Thou hast thy mistress still, to boot, my son,
Who shall take notice of thee: I'll move the king
To any shape of thy preferment such
As thou'lt desire
That set thee on to this desert, am bound
To load thy merit richly. Call my women:
Think on my words.
Exit PISANIO
A sly and constant knave,
Not to be shaked
And the remembrancer of her to hold
The hand-fast to her lord. I have given him that
Which, if he take, shall quite unpeople her
Of liegers for her sweet, and which she after,
Except she bend her humour, shall be assured
To taste of too.
Re-enter PISANIO and Ladies
So, so: well done, well done:
The violets, cowslips, and the primroses,
Bear to my closet. Fare thee well, Pisanio
Think on my words.
Exeunt QUEEN and Ladies
And shall do:
But when to my good lord I prove untrue,
I'll choke myself: there's all I'll do for you.
Exit
SCENE VI. The same. Another room in the palace.
Enter IMOGEN
A father cruel, and a step-dame false
A foolish suitor to a wedded lady,
That hath her husband banish'd
My supreme crown of grief! and those repeated
Vexations of it! Had I been thief-stol'n,
As my two brothers, happy! but most miserable
Is the desire that's glorious: blest be those,
How mean soe'er, that have their honest wills,
Which seasons comfort. Who may this be? Fie!
Enter PISANIO and IACHIMO
Madam, a noble gentleman of Rome,
Comes from my lord with letters.
Change you, madam?
The worthy Leonatus is in safety
And greets your highness dearly.
Presents a letter
Thanks, good sir:
You're kindly welcome.
[Aside]  All of her that is out of door most rich!
If she be furnish'd with a mind so rare,
She is alone the Arabian bird, and I
Have lost the wager. Boldness be my friend!
Arm me, audacity, from head to foot!
Or, like the Parthian, I shall flying fight
Rather directly fly.
[Reads]  'He is one of the noblest note, to whose
kindnesses I am most infinitely tied. Reflect upon
him accordingly, as you value your trust--
LEONATUS.'
So far I read aloud:
But even the very middle of my heart
Is warm'd by the rest, and takes it thankfully.
You are as welcome, worthy sir, as I
Have words to bid you, and shall find it so
In all that I can do.
Thanks, fairest lady.
What, are men mad? Hath nature given them eyes
To see this vaulted arch, and the rich crop
Of sea and land, which can distinguish 'twixt
The fiery orbs above and the twinn'd stones
Upon the number'd beach? and can we not
Partition make with spectacles so precious
'Twixt fair and foul?
What makes your admiration?
It cannot be i' the eye, for apes and monkeys
'Twixt two such shes would chatter this way and
Contemn with mows the other
For idiots in this case of favour would
Be wisely definite
Sluttery to such neat excellence opposed
Should make desire vomit emptiness,
Not so allured to feed.
What is the matter, trow?
The cloyed will,
That satiate yet unsatisfied desire, that tub
Both fill'd and running, ravening first the lamb
Longs after for the garbage.
What, dear sir,
Thus raps you? Are you well?
Thanks, madam
To PISANIO
Beseech you, sir, desire
My man's abode where I did leave him: he
Is strange and peevish.
I was going, sir,
To give him welcome.
Exit
Continues well my lord? His health, beseech you?
Well, madam.
Is he disposed to mirth? I hope he is.
Exceeding pleasant
So merry and so gamesome: he is call'd
The Briton reveller.
When he was here,
He did incline to sadness, and oft-times
Not knowing why.
I never saw him sad.
There is a Frenchman his companion, one
An eminent monsieur, that, it seems, much loves
A Gallian girl at home
The thick sighs from him, whiles the jolly Briton--
Your lord, I mean--laughs from's free lungs, cries 'O,
Can my sides hold, to think that man, who knows
By history, report, or his own proof,
What woman is, yea, what she cannot choose
But must be, will his free hours languish for
Assured bondage?'
Will my lord say so?
Ay, madam, with his eyes in flood with laughter:
It is a recreation to be by
And hear him mock the Frenchman. But, heavens know,
Some men are much to blame.
Not he, I hope.
Not he: but yet heaven's bounty towards him might
Be used more thankfully. In himself, 'tis much
In you, which I account his beyond all talents,
Whilst I am bound to wonder, I am bound
To pity too.
What do you pity, sir?
Two creatures heartily.
Am I one, sir?
You look on me: what wreck discern you in me
Deserves your pity?
Lamentable! What,
To hide me from the radiant sun and solace
I' the dungeon by a snuff?
I pray you, sir,
Deliver with more openness your answers
To my demands. Why do you pity me?
That others do--
I was about to say--enjoy your--But
It is an office of the gods to venge it,
Not mine to speak on 't.
You do seem to know
Something of me, or what concerns me: pray you,--
Since doubling things go ill often hurts more
Than to be sure they do
Either are past remedies, or, timely knowing,
The remedy then born--discover to me
What both you spur and stop.
Had I this cheek
To bathe my lips upon
Whose every touch, would force the feeler's soul
To the oath of loyalty
Takes prisoner the wild motion of mine eye,
Fixing it only here
Slaver with lips as common as the stairs
That mount the Capitol
Made hard with hourly falsehood--falsehood, as
With labour
Base and unlustrous as the smoky light
That's fed with stinking tallow
That all the plagues of hell should at one time
Encounter such revolt.
My lord, I fear,
Has forgot Britain.
And himself. Not I,
Inclined to this intelligence, pronounce
The beggary of his change
That from pay mutest conscience to my tongue
Charms this report out.
Let me hear no more.
O dearest soul! your cause doth strike my heart
With pity, that doth make me sick. A lady
So fair, and fasten'd to an empery,
Would make the great'st king double,--to be partner'd
With tomboys hired with that self-exhibition
Which your own coffers yield! with diseased ventures
That play with all infirmities for gold
Which rottenness can lend nature! such boil'd stuff
As well might poison poison! Be revenged
Or she that bore you was no queen, and you
Recoil from your great stock.
Revenged!
How should I be revenged? If this be true,--
As I have such a heart that both mine ears
Must not in haste abuse--if it be true,
How should I be revenged?
Should he make me
Live, like Diana's priest, betwixt cold sheets,
Whiles he is vaulting variable ramps,
In your despite, upon your purse? Revenge it.
I dedicate myself to your sweet pleasure,
More noble than that runagate to your bed,
And will continue fast to your affection,
Still close as sure.
What, ho, Pisanio!
Let me my service tender on your lips.
Away! I do condemn mine ears that have
So long attended thee. If thou wert honourable,
Thou wouldst have told this tale for virtue, not
For such an end thou seek'st,--as base as strange.
Thou wrong'st a gentleman, who is as far
From thy report as thou from honour, and
Solicit'st here a lady that disdains
Thee and the devil alike. What ho, Pisanio!
The king my father shall be made acquainted
Of thy assault: if he shall think it fit,
A saucy stranger in his court to mart
As in a Romish stew and to expound
His beastly mind to us, he hath a court
He little cares for and a daughter who
He not respects at all. What, ho, Pisanio!
O happy Leonatus! I may say
The credit that thy lady hath of thee
Deserves thy trust, and thy most perfect goodness
Her assured credit. Blessed live you long!
A lady to the worthiest sir that ever
Country call'd his! and you his mistress, only
For the most worthiest fit! Give me your pardon.
I have spoke this, to know if your affiance
Were deeply rooted
That which he is, new o'er: and he is one
The truest manner'd
That he enchants societies into him
Half all men's hearts are his.
You make amends.
He sits 'mongst men like a descended god:
He hath a kind of honour sets him off,
More than a mortal seeming. Be not angry,
Most mighty princess, that I have adventured
To try your taking a false report
Honour'd with confirmation your great judgment
In the election of a sir so rare,
Which you know cannot err: the love I bear him
Made me to fan you thus, but the gods made you,
Unlike all others, chaffless. Pray, your pardon.
All's well, sir: take my power i' the court
for yours.
My humble thanks. I had almost forgot
To entreat your grace but in a small request,
And yet of moment to, for it concerns
Your lord
Are partners in the business.
Pray, what is't?
Some dozen Romans of us and your lord--
The best feather of our wing--have mingled sums
To buy a present for the emperor
Which I, the factor for the rest, have done
In France: 'tis plate of rare device, and jewels
Of rich and exquisite form
And I am something curious, being strange,
To have them in safe stowage: may it please you
To take them in protection?
Willingly
And pawn mine honour for their safety: since
My lord hath interest in them, I will keep them
In my bedchamber.
They are in a trunk,
Attended by my men: I will make bold
To send them to you, only for this night
I must aboard to-morrow.
O, no, no.
Yes, I beseech
By lengthening my return. From Gallia
I cross'd the seas on purpose and on promise
To see your grace.
I thank you for your pains:
But not away to-morrow!
O, I must, madam:
Therefore I shall beseech you, if you please
To greet your lord with writing, do't to-night:
I have outstood my time
To the tender of our present.
I will write.
Send your trunk to me
And truly yielded you. You're very welcome.
Exeunt
ACT II
SCENE I. Britain. Before Cymbeline's palace.
Enter CLOTEN and two Lords
Was there ever man had such luck! when I kissed the
jack, upon an up-cast to be hit away! I had a
hundred pound on't: and then a whoreson jackanapes
must take me up for swearing
oaths of him and might not spend them at my pleasure.
What got he by that? You have broke his pate with
your bowl.
[Aside]  If his wit had been like him that broke it,
it would have run all out.
When a gentleman is disposed to swear, it is not for
any standers-by to curtail his oaths, ha?
No my lord
Aside
nor crop the ears of them.
Whoreson dog! I give him satisfaction?
Would he had been one of my rank!
[Aside]  To have smelt like a fool.
I am not vexed more at any thing in the earth: a
pox on't! I had rather not be so noble as I am
they dare not fight with me, because of the queen my
mother: every Jack-slave hath his bellyful of
fighting, and I must go up and down like a cock that
nobody can match.
[Aside]  You are cock and capon too
cock, with your comb on.
Sayest thou?
It is not fit your lordship should undertake every
companion that you give offence to.
No, I know that: but it is fit I should commit
offence to my inferiors.
Ay, it is fit for your lordship only.
Why, so I say.
Did you hear of a stranger that's come to court to-night?
A stranger, and I not know on't!
[Aside]  He's a strange fellow himself, and knows it
not.
There's an Italian come
Leonatus' friends.
Leonatus! a banished rascal
whatsoever he be. Who told you of this stranger?
One of your lordship's pages.
Is it fit I went to look upon him? is there no
derogation in't?
You cannot derogate, my lord.
Not easily, I think.
[Aside]  You are a fool granted
issues, being foolish, do not derogate.
Come, I'll go see this Italian: what I have lost
to-day at bowls I'll win to-night of him. Come, go.
I'll attend your lordship.
Exeunt CLOTEN and First Lord
That such a crafty devil as is his mother
Should yield the world this ass! a woman that
Bears all down with her brain
Cannot take two from twenty, for his heart,
And leave eighteen. Alas, poor princess,
Thou divine Imogen, what thou endurest,
Betwixt a father by thy step-dame govern'd,
A mother hourly coining plots, a wooer
More hateful than the foul expulsion is
Of thy dear husband, than that horrid act
Of the divorce he'ld make! The heavens hold firm
The walls of thy dear honour, keep unshaked
That temple, thy fair mind, that thou mayst stand,
To enjoy thy banish'd lord and this great land!
Exit
SCENE II. Imogen's bedchamber in Cymbeline's palace:
a trunk in one corner of it.
IMOGEN in bed, reading
Who's there? my woman Helen?
Please you, madam
What hour is it?
Almost midnight, madam.
I have read three hours then: mine eyes are weak:
Fold down the leaf where I have left: to bed:
Take not away the taper, leave it burning
And if thou canst awake by four o' the clock,
I prithee, call me. Sleep hath seized me wholly
Exit Lady
To your protection I commend me, gods.
From fairies and the tempters of the night
Guard me, beseech ye.
Sleeps. IACHIMO comes from the trunk
The crickets sing, and man's o'er-labour'd sense
Repairs itself by rest. Our Tarquin thus
Did softly press the rushes, ere he waken'd
The chastity he wounded. Cytherea,
How bravely thou becomest thy bed, fresh lily,
And whiter than the sheets! That I might touch!
But kiss
How dearly they do't! 'Tis her breathing that
Perfumes the chamber thus: the flame o' the taper
Bows toward her, and would under-peep her lids,
To see the enclosed lights, now canopied
Under these windows, white and azure laced
With blue of heaven's own tinct. But my design,
To note the chamber: I will write all down:
Such and such pictures
The adornment of her bed
Why, such and such
Ah, but some natural notes about her body,
Above ten thousand meaner moveables
Would testify, to enrich mine inventory.
O sleep, thou ape of death, lie dull upon her!
And be her sense but as a monument,
Thus in a chapel lying! Come off, come off:
Taking off her bracelet
As slippery as the Gordian knot was hard!
'Tis mine
As strongly as the conscience does within,
To the madding of her lord. On her left breast
A mole cinque-spotted, like the crimson drops
I' the bottom of a cowslip: here's a voucher,
Stronger than ever law could make: this secret
Will force him think I have pick'd the lock and ta'en
The treasure of her honour. No more. To what end?
Why should I write this down, that's riveted,
Screw'd to my memory? She hath been reading late
The tale of Tereus
Where Philomel gave up. I have enough:
To the trunk again, and shut the spring of it.
Swift, swift, you dragons of the night, that dawning
May bare the raven's eye! I lodge in fear
Though this a heavenly angel, hell is here.
Clock strikes
One, two, three: time, time!
Goes into the trunk. The scene closes
An ante-chamber adjoining Imogen's apartments.
Enter CLOTEN and Lords
Your lordship is the most patient man in loss, the
most coldest that ever turned up ace.
It would make any man cold to lose.
But not every man patient after the noble temper of
your lordship. You are most hot and furious when you win.
Winning will put any man into courage. If I could
get this foolish Imogen, I should have gold enough.
It's almost morning, is't not?
Day, my lord.
I would this music would come: I am advised to give
her music o' mornings
Enter Musicians
Come on
fingering, so
will do, let her remain
First, a very excellent good-conceited thing
after, a wonderful sweet air, with admirable rich
words to it: and then let her consider.
SONG
Hark, hark! the lark at heaven's gate sings,
And Phoebus 'gins arise,
His steeds to water at those springs
On chaliced flowers that lies
And winking Mary-buds begin
To ope their golden eyes:
With every thing that pretty is,
My lady sweet, arise:
Arise, arise.
So, get you gone. If this penetrate, I will
consider your music the better: if it do not, it is
a vice in her ears, which horse-hairs and
calves'-guts, nor the voice of unpaved eunuch to
boot, can never amend.
Exeunt Musicians
Here comes the king.
I am glad I was up so late
was up so early: he cannot choose but take this
service I have done fatherly.
Enter CYMBELINE and QUEEN
Good morrow to your majesty and to my gracious mother.
Attend you here the door of our stern daughter?
Will she not forth?
I have assailed her with music, but she vouchsafes no notice.
The exile of her minion is too new
She hath not yet forgot him: some more time
Must wear the print of his remembrance out,
And then she's yours.
You are most bound to the king,
Who lets go by no vantages that may
Prefer you to his daughter. Frame yourself
To orderly soliciting, and be friended
With aptness of the season
Increase your services
You were inspired to do those duties which
You tender to her
Save when command to your dismission tends,
And therein you are senseless.
Senseless! not so.
Enter a Messenger
So like you, sir, ambassadors from Rome
The one is Caius Lucius.
A worthy fellow,
Albeit he comes on angry purpose now
But that's no fault of his: we must receive him
According to the honour of his sender
And towards himself, his goodness forespent on us,
We must extend our notice. Our dear son,
When you have given good morning to your mistress,
Attend the queen and us
To employ you towards this Roman. Come, our queen.
Exeunt all but CLOTEN
If she be up, I'll speak with her
Let her lie still and dream.
Knocks
By your leave, ho!
I Know her women are about her: what
If I do line one of their hands? 'Tis gold
Which buys admittance
Diana's rangers false themselves, yield up
Their deer to the stand o' the stealer
Which makes the true man kill'd and saves the thief
Nay, sometime hangs both thief and true man: what
Can it not do and undo? I will make
One of her women lawyer to me, for
I yet not understand the case myself.
Knocks
By your leave.
Enter a Lady
Who's there that knocks?
A gentleman.
No more?
Yes, and a gentlewoman's son.
That's more
Than some, whose tailors are as dear as yours,
Can justly boast of. What's your lordship's pleasure?
Your lady's person: is she ready?
Ay,
To keep her chamber.
There is gold for you
Sell me your good report.
How! my good name? or to report of you
What I shall think is good?--The princess!
Enter IMOGEN
Good morrow, fairest: sister, your sweet hand.
Exit Lady
Good morrow, sir. You lay out too much pains
For purchasing but trouble
Is telling you that I am poor of thanks
And scarce can spare them.
Still, I swear I love you.
If you but said so, 'twere as deep with me:
If you swear still, your recompense is still
That I regard it not.
This is no answer.
But that you shall not say I yield being silent,
I would not speak. I pray you, spare me: 'faith,
I shall unfold equal discourtesy
To your best kindness: one of your great knowing
Should learn, being taught, forbearance.
To leave you in your madness, 'twere my sin:
I will not.
Fools are not mad folks.
Do you call me fool?
As I am mad, I do:
If you'll be patient, I'll no more be mad
That cures us both. I am much sorry, sir,
You put me to forget a lady's manners,
By being so verbal: and learn now, for all,
That I, which know my heart, do here pronounce,
By the very truth of it, I care not for you,
And am so near the lack of charity--
To accuse myself--I hate you
You felt than make't my boast.
You sin against
Obedience, which you owe your father. For
The contract you pretend with that base wretch,
One bred of alms and foster'd with cold dishes,
With scraps o' the court, it is no contract, none:
And though it be allow'd in meaner parties--
Yet who than he more mean?--to knit their souls,
On whom there is no more dependency
But brats and beggary, in self-figured knot
Yet you are curb'd from that enlargement by
The consequence o' the crown, and must not soil
The precious note of it with a base slave.
A hilding for a livery, a squire's cloth,
A pantler, not so eminent.
Profane fellow
Wert thou the son of Jupiter and no more
But what thou art besides, thou wert too base
To be his groom: thou wert dignified enough,
Even to the point of envy, if 'twere made
Comparative for your virtues, to be styled
The under-hangman of his kingdom, and hated
For being preferred so well.
The south-fog rot him!
He never can meet more mischance than come
To be but named of thee. His meanest garment,
That ever hath but clipp'd his body, is dearer
In my respect than all the hairs above thee,
Were they all made such men. How now, Pisanio!
Enter PISANIO
'His garment!' Now the devil--
To Dorothy my woman hie thee presently--
'His garment!'
I am sprited with a fool.
Frighted, and anger'd worse: go bid my woman
Search for a jewel that too casually
Hath left mine arm: it was thy master's: 'shrew me,
If I would lose it for a revenue
Of any king's in Europe. I do think
I saw't this morning: confident I am
Last night 'twas on mine arm
I hope it be not gone to tell my lord
That I kiss aught but he.
'Twill not be lost.
I hope so: go and search.
Exit PISANIO
You have abused me:
'His meanest garment!'
Ay, I said so, sir:
If you will make't an action, call witness to't.
I will inform your father.
Your mother too:
She's my good lady, and will conceive, I hope,
But the worst of me. So, I leave you, sir,
To the worst of discontent.
Exit
I'll be revenged:
'His meanest garment!' Well.
Exit
CYMBELINE
SCENE IV. Rome. Philario's house.
Enter POSTHUMUS and PHILARIO
Fear it not, sir: I would I were so sure
To win the king as I am bold her honour
Will remain hers.
What means do you make to him?
Not any, but abide the change of time,
Quake in the present winter's state and wish
That warmer days would come: in these sear'd hopes,
I barely gratify your love
I must die much your debtor.
Your very goodness and your company
O'erpays all I can do. By this, your king
Hath heard of great Augustus: Caius Lucius
Will do's commission throughly: and I think
He'll grant the tribute, send the arrearages,
Or look upon our Romans, whose remembrance
Is yet fresh in their grief.
I do believe,
Statist though I am none, nor like to be,
That this will prove a war
The legions now in Gallia sooner landed
In our not-fearing Britain than have tidings
Of any penny tribute paid. Our countrymen
Are men more order'd than when Julius Caesar
Smiled at their lack of skill, but found
their courage
Worthy his frowning at: their discipline,
Now mingled with their courages, will make known
To their approvers they are people such
That mend upon the world.
Enter IACHIMO
See! Iachimo!
The swiftest harts have posted you by land
And winds of all the comers kiss'd your sails,
To make your vessel nimble.
Welcome, sir.
I hope the briefness of your answer made
The speediness of your return.
Your lady
Is one of the fairest that I have look'd upon.
And therewithal the best
Look through a casement to allure false hearts
And be false with them.
Here are letters for you.
Their tenor good, I trust.
'Tis very like.
Was Caius Lucius in the Britain court
When you were there?
He was expected then,
But not approach'd.
All is well yet.
Sparkles this stone as it was wont? or is't not
Too dull for your good wearing?
If I had lost it,
I should have lost the worth of it in gold.
I'll make a journey twice as far, to enjoy
A second night of such sweet shortness which
Was mine in Britain, for the ring is won.
The stone's too hard to come by.
Not a whit,
Your lady being so easy.
Make not, sir,
Your loss your sport: I hope you know that we
Must not continue friends.
Good sir, we must,
If you keep covenant. Had I not brought
The knowledge of your mistress home, I grant
We were to question further: but I now
Profess myself the winner of her honour,
Together with your ring
Of her or you, having proceeded but
By both your wills.
If you can make't apparent
That you have tasted her in bed, my hand
And ring is yours
You had of her pure honour gains or loses
Your sword or mine, or masterless leaves both
To who shall find them.
Sir, my circumstances,
Being so near the truth as I will make them,
Must first induce you to believe: whose strength
I will confirm with oath
You'll give me leave to spare, when you shall find
You need it not.
Proceed.
First, her bedchamber,--
Where, I confess, I slept not, but profess
Had that was well worth watching--it was hang'd
With tapesty of silk and silver
Proud Cleopatra, when she met her Roman,
And Cydnus swell'd above the banks, or for
The press of boats or pride: a piece of work
So bravely done, so rich, that it did strive
In workmanship and value
Could be so rarely and exactly wrought,
Since the true life on't was--
This is true
And this you might have heard of here, by me,
Or by some other.
More particulars
Must justify my knowledge.
So they must,
Or do your honour injury.
The chimney
Is south the chamber, and the chimney-piece
Chaste Dian bathing: never saw I figures
So likely to report themselves: the cutter
Was as another nature, dumb
Motion and breath left out.
This is a thing
Which you might from relation likewise reap,
Being, as it is, much spoke of.
The roof o' the chamber
With golden cherubins is fretted: her andirons--
I had forgot them--were two winking Cupids
Of silver, each on one foot standing, nicely
Depending on their brands.
This is her honour!
Let it be granted you have seen all this--and praise
Be given to your remembrance--the description
Of what is in her chamber nothing saves
The wager you have laid.
Then, if you can,
Showing the bracelet
Be pale: I beg but leave to air this jewel
And now 'tis up again: it must be married
To that your diamond
Jove!
Once more let me behold it: is it that
Which I left with her?
Sir--I thank her--that:
She stripp'd it from her arm
Her pretty action did outsell her gift,
And yet enrich'd it too: she gave it me, and said
She prized it once.
May be she pluck'd it off
To send it me.
She writes so to you, doth she?
O, no, no, no! 'tis true. Here, take this too
Gives the ring
It is a basilisk unto mine eye,
Kills me to look on't. Let there be no honour
Where there is beauty
Where there's another man: the vows of women
Of no more bondage be, to where they are made,
Than they are to their virtues
O, above measure false!
Have patience, sir,
And take your ring again
It may be probable she lost it
Who knows if one of her women, being corrupted,
Hath stol'n it from her?
Very true
And so, I hope, he came by't. Back my ring:
Render to me some corporal sign about her,
More evident than this
By Jupiter, I had it from her arm.
Hark you, he swears
'Tis true:--nay, keep the ring--'tis true: I am sure
She would not lose it: her attendants are
All sworn and honourable:--they induced to steal it!
And by a stranger!--No, he hath enjoyed her:
The cognizance of her incontinency
Is this: she hath bought the name of whore
thus dearly.
There, take thy hire
Divide themselves between you!
Sir, be patient:
This is not strong enough to be believed
Of one persuaded well of--
Never talk on't
She hath been colted by him.
If you seek
For further satisfying, under her breast--
Worthy the pressing--lies a mole, right proud
Of that most delicate lodging: by my life,
I kiss'd it
To feed again, though full. You do remember
This stain upon her?
Ay, and it doth confirm
Another stain, as big as hell can hold,
Were there no more but it.
Will you hear more?
Spare your arithmetic: never count the turns
Once, and a million!
I'll be sworn--
No swearing.
If you will swear you have not done't, you lie
And I will kill thee, if thou dost deny
Thou'st made me cuckold.
I'll deny nothing.
O, that I had her here, to tear her limb-meal!
I will go there and do't, i' the court, before
Her father. I'll do something--
Exit
Quite besides
The government of patience! You have won:
Let's follow him, and pervert the present wrath
He hath against himself.
With an my heart.
Exeunt
SCENE V. Another room in Philario's house.
Enter POSTHUMUS LEONATUS
Is there no way for men to be but women
Must be half-workers? We are all bastards
And that most venerable man which I
Did call my father, was I know not where
When I was stamp'd
Made me a counterfeit: yet my mother seem'd
The Dian of that time so doth my wife
The nonpareil of this. O, vengeance, vengeance!
Me of my lawful pleasure she restrain'd
And pray'd me oft forbearance
A pudency so rosy the sweet view on't
Might well have warm'd old Saturn
As chaste as unsunn'd snow. O, all the devils!
This yellow Iachimo, in an hour,--wast not?--
Or less,--at first?--perchance he spoke not, but,
Like a full-acorn'd boar, a German one,
Cried 'O!' and mounted
But what he look'd for should oppose and she
Should from encounter guard. Could I find out
The woman's part in me! For there's no motion
That tends to vice in man, but I affirm
It is the woman's part: be it lying, note it,
The woman's
Lust and rank thoughts, hers, hers
Ambitions, covetings, change of prides, disdain,
Nice longing, slanders, mutability,
All faults that may be named, nay, that hell knows,
Why, hers, in part or all
For even to vice
They are not constant but are changing still
One vice, but of a minute old, for one
Not half so old as that. I'll write against them,
Detest them, curse them: yet 'tis greater skill
In a true hate, to pray they have their will:
The very devils cannot plague them better.
Exit
ACT III
SCENE I. Britain. A hall in Cymbeline's palace.
Enter in state, CYMBELINE, QUEEN, CLOTEN,  and Lords at one door, and at another, CAIUS LUCIUS and Attendants
Now say, what would Augustus Caesar with us?
When Julius Caesar, whose remembrance yet
Lives in men's eyes and will to ears and tongues
Be theme and hearing ever, was in this Britain
And conquer'd it, Cassibelan, thine uncle,--
Famous in Caesar's praises, no whit less
Than in his feats deserving it--for him
And his succession granted Rome a tribute,
Yearly three thousand pounds, which by thee lately
Is left untender'd.
And, to kill the marvel,
Shall be so ever.
There be many Caesars,
Ere such another Julius. Britain is
A world by itself
For wearing our own noses.
That opportunity
Which then they had to take from 's, to resume
We have again. Remember, sir, my liege,
The kings your ancestors, together with
The natural bravery of your isle, which stands
As Neptune's park, ribbed and paled in
With rocks unscalable and roaring waters,
With sands that will not bear your enemies' boats,
But suck them up to the topmast. A kind of conquest
Caesar made here
Of 'Came' and 'saw' and 'overcame: ' with shame--
That first that ever touch'd him--he was carried
From off our coast, twice beaten
Poor ignorant baubles!-- upon our terrible seas,
Like egg-shells moved upon their surges, crack'd
As easily 'gainst our rocks: for joy whereof
The famed Cassibelan, who was once at point--
O giglot fortune!--to master Caesar's sword,
Made Lud's town with rejoicing fires bright
And Britons strut with courage.
Come, there's no more tribute to be paid: our
kingdom is stronger than it was at that time
as I said, there is no moe such Caesars: other of
them may have crook'd noses, but to owe such
straight arms, none.
Son, let your mother end.
We have yet many among us can gripe as hard as
Cassibelan: I do not say I am one
hand. Why tribute? why should we pay tribute? If
Caesar can hide the sun from us with a blanket, or
put the moon in his pocket, we will pay him tribute
for light
You must know,
Till the injurious Romans did extort
This tribute from us, we were free:
Caesar's ambition,
Which swell'd so much that it did almost stretch
The sides o' the world, against all colour here
Did put the yoke upon 's
Becomes a warlike people, whom we reckon
Ourselves to be.
We do.
Say, then, to Caesar,
Our ancestor was that Mulmutius which
Ordain'd our laws, whose use the sword of Caesar
Hath too much mangled
Shall, by the power we hold, be our good deed,
Though Rome be therefore angry: Mulmutius made our laws,
Who was the first of Britain which did put
His brows within a golden crown and call'd
Himself a king.
I am sorry, Cymbeline,
That I am to pronounce Augustus Caesar--
Caesar, that hath more kings his servants than
Thyself domestic officers--thine enemy:
Receive it from me, then: war and confusion
In Caesar's name pronounce I 'gainst thee: look
For fury not to be resisted. Thus defied,
I thank thee for myself.
Thou art welcome, Caius.
Thy Caesar knighted me
Much under him
Which he to seek of me again, perforce,
Behoves me keep at utterance. I am perfect
That the Pannonians and Dalmatians for
Their liberties are now in arms
Which not to read would show the Britons cold:
So Caesar shall not find them.
Let proof speak.
His majesty bids you welcome. Make
pastime with us a day or two, or longer: if
you seek us afterwards in other terms, you
shall find us in our salt-water girdle: if you
beat us out of it, it is yours
the adventure, our crows shall fare the better
for you
So, sir.
I know your master's pleasure and he mine:
All the remain is 'Welcome!'
Exeunt
SCENE II. Another room in the palace.
Enter PISANIO, with a letter
How? of adultery? Wherefore write you not
What monster's her accuser? Leonatus,
O master! what a strange infection
Is fall'n into thy ear! What false Italian,
As poisonous-tongued as handed, hath prevail'd
On thy too ready hearing? Disloyal! No:
